What Palestinians should understand about Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon's unilateral plan are first that it is real, and second that the
United States is in broad agreement with it. This situation presents
Palestinians with a critical question: what do they really want?

The US will not agree to everything Israel might want to do. The exact
route of the security fence is still under discussion. The US will
oppose an eastern fence, between the ridgeline and the Jordan Valley,
and will oppose the annexation of any West Bank territory to Israel.

Don't be fooled, however, by the coming tussles over details. The
critical components of Sharon's plan are: 1) settlement evacuation in
almost all of Gaza and next to Palestinian cities in the West Bank, 2)
increasing the population in the settlement blocs, such as Gush Etzion
and Ma'ale Adumim, that Israel expects to keep, 3) continued military
action against terrorism and missile threats in Palestinian areas, as
necessary.

The US will support Israel on all three counts, because the package is
not seen to conflict with George W. Bush's two state vision and the
roadmap to it. So long as Palestinians choose the path of terror and
violence, the US will press Israel to minimize the impact of its fight
on Palestinian civilians, but will not oppose broad military actions
against the terrorists themselves. Further, it is an open question how
long the US and Israel will continue to hold harmless a Palestinian
Authority which barely hides its support for terror, and certainly does
not lift a finger to stop it.

If there is a wild card in both US and Israeli policy in the year ahead,
it is to what extent Bush's original June 2002 message
                    on the need for a new Palestinian leadership will be
revived. During the run-up to the war in Iraq, that message morphed into
the roadmap                         and the US-European demand for a
Palestinian prime minister. Now Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein is gone, but
so is the idea that a Palestinian prime minister will painlessly wrest
Yasser Arafat's veto power away from him and allow the crackdown against
terror necessary for real negotiations to begin.

Though Sharon's plan is rightly seen as consistent with the goal and
broad structure of the roadmap, the means are a substitute for that
plan. Further, Sharon's unilateralism is at least a detour from the
belief in the necessity of Palestinian regime change that a short time
ago Bush and Sharon seemed to share.

But this detour, while seemingly shifting the focus away from Bush's new
leadership demand, could bring its wisdom into sharper focus. Yasser
Arafat's serial torpedoing of the 2000 Camp David summit, the roadmap,
and two successive prime ministers has demonstrated that he will never
abandon terror or the demand of "return," and therefore will never sign
a final two state peace with Israel. Sharon's separation will further
highlight the Palestinians' choice between continuing to fight Israel
far past the point of diminishing returns, or getting on with creating
their own state.

For a generation, Israel was torn between two incompatible paradigms:
staking a claim over all the territories, and trading them for peace.
Sharon's plan is designed to cut this Gordian knot in favor of land for
peace. This forces Palestinians to face their own Gordian knot: choosing
between contradictory attempts to destroy Israel and make peace with it.

The idea that United Nations votes can accomplish what tanks could not
is a tempting one for Palestinians. Time, and demography, are on their
side, goes this thinking. And the tremendous sacrifices in the current
war would not be for naught, but the harbingers of a total victory.

But in its unrealism this Palestinian messianism resembles nothing if
not that of "greater Israel" proponents who believed the circle could
somehow be squared between demography and democracy. The Palestinians
cannot, after they convinced the entire world they wanted a state next
to Israel, say "we changed our minds, we want to become citizens of
Israel," against the will of even left-wing Israelis like Amos Oz.

So the Palestinians have a choice. Bet on the world joining, and Israel
succumbing to, a campaign telling Israelis, "yes, you must commit
suicide and become the 22nd Arab state." Or alternatively, drop terror
and the demand of "return" to Israel in exchange for a partition and a
state of their own.

It took over 30 years for Israel to settle the debate between trying to
keep the land and giving it up (though Sadat-like Palestinian gestures
would have convinced Israelis much sooner). It is taking Palestinians
even longer to decide between trying to destroy Israel and living next
to it. The Sharon plan and US support for it, which will not be
fundamentally reversed even if the Democrats take the White House in
November, mean that the territorial price the Palestinians pay for
delaying their decision will only go up over time. 

