The United States is not in the habit of making public its disagreements
with Israel, if any exist. For that reason it takes some effort to
deduce whether the American and Israeli administrations are in
concordance over Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's recent proposals.
This ambiguity, of course, is all part of the special relationship and
strategic friendship that Israel and the United States share. One can,
however, extrapolate that there is not complete agreement on the issue:
usually when their policies mesh, the United States says so quite publicly.

But it is not difficult to see the possible discrepancies between the
shadowy outline Sharon has offered of his unilateral "disengagement"
plan and the American position. The Americans are the main authors and
promoters of a detailed plan and concept in the form of the roadmap
                       , a series of stages based on multilateralism and
reciprocal moves, intensive security cooperation and eventual
negotiations to determine a conclusive solution of difficult final
status issues like Jerusalem, refugees, borders, settlements, etc. In
addition, the roadmap takes an explicit and robust position against
Israeli settlements in the occupied territories and continuing
settlement expansion.

The outline of Israeli unilateral "disengagement" on the other hand is
entirely different. It is one-sided by name and definition and involves
little cooperation or negotiation. It is based solely on the desires and
interests of one party at the expense of the needs and demands of the
other. For example, while the Israeli "disengagement" plan involves
possible partial withdrawal from some of the occupied territories, it
also involves consolidating the occupation in the rest of the
territories, using the contours of the wall that is being built deep
into the West Bank as the contours of the future expansion of Israel.
Inside the wall, the vast majority of Palestinians will be confined to
the least possible area of land. While the roadmap calls for ending the
37-year-old Israeli occupation, these unilateral Israeli steps are
intended to rearrange Palestinian oppression. Another fundamental
difference between Sharon's ideas and the vision personally articulated
by US President Bush is the crucial notion of two viable and independent
states, living side by side. The unilateral Israeli "disengagement" plan
eliminates this possibility by allowing for a Palestinian entity that
the Israeli government will not mind calling a "state" because in fact,
it will be neither independent nor viable--the perfect neighbor for a
maximalist, insatiable, bullying Israel.

As such, although the American administration is diplomatically hiding
its dispute with Israel, the differences are plain. But the absence of a
clear US position, as well as any pressure on Israel to pursue the
stated American goals, is responsible for encouraging Israel to continue
its strategy of achieving objectives by force (which, one might add,
have achieved nothing). What is needed from the United States is to
deliver Israel to the roadmap as the only plan for Middle East peace
that was drafted by the United States and has the full force of
international legitimacy after its adoption by the United Nations
Security Council.

