The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has always been strongly tied to the
political agenda of the United States. That is only one manifestation of
both sides' unusually deep dependence on external actors. Time and time
again, it has been shown that when the parties are left without a
minimum of attention from the outside (the US especially) political and
security deterioration results. The only times that we have witnessed
progress, on the other hand, were those in which the US and other
countries exerted special efforts towards making agreements,
implementing them, or controlling otherwise explosive situations.

As such, there may be no time more difficult for us than the coming
year. The United States' elections, American involvement in Iraq, Arab
disengagement for all sorts of reasons including the war, the rise to
power of the most extreme right-wing government in the history of Israel
and finally, the shift in the balance of power within Palestinian
society against the peace camp, a shift born of the absence of any
genuine political prospect and Israel's systematic efforts to dismantle
the Palestinian Authority as the standard bearer of Palestinian
moderation, are all foreboding signs.

Elections in the United States affect the conflict in several ways.
Mainly, the American administration will focus on internal American
politics, thus neglecting its political investments in the Middle East.
Second, since the Middle East is controversial in American politics, and
because of the significance of pro-Israel Jewish votes and their
accompanying campaign finance contributions, the administration will
avoid drawing attention to the Middle East just to avoid any missteps.
That is particularly so these days, as any American-proposed solutions
are liable to require placing pressure on the Israeli government and
exposing public differences. One example of this is the recent US
decision to deduct nearly $300 million in loan guarantees from US funds
to Israel because of Israel's decision to continue to build its wall. At
the moment, at least, the ball appears to be in Israel's court.

On the Palestinian side, the climate is increasingly conducive to
peacemaking. There is a new and approved government, a good working
relationship between the president and prime minister, and quite hopeful
Egyptian-Palestinian efforts towards a comprehensive ceasefire including
all of the Palestinian factions.

Israel, on the other hand, has continued building the
apartheid/separation wall despite the United Nations vote of 144
countries condemning the wall, and in spite of the public American
criticism. Israel insists on expanding its illegal Jewish settlements
built in occupied territory and land that is owned by Palestinian
individuals who still have the land deeds of ownership. It also
continues to impose checkpoints that are responsible for transforming
Palestinian life into misery and humiliating all alike. In order to move
forward, the United States will have to pressure Israel, and
conventional wisdom says that pressuring Israel is impossible in an
election year.

The vacuum certain to result is a terribly dangerous one. This Israel
government has demonstrated that, barring any damage to its relationship
with the United States, there are no limits to the extent to which it
will harm Palestinians and the cause of peace (this Israeli government's
short-sighted policies have even done significant damage to Israel's
image abroad).

Therefore, in order to avoid catastrophe in this critical next year,
other major world players, in full coordination with the United States
government if possible, must step to the plate. The obvious candidates
are the Quartet, the European Union or even just Britain, all of whom
have shown themselves useful in previous tough times.

