United States President George W. Bush's speech was a major
disappointment for all concerned, except for extremists and right wing
politicians in Israel. Even the G-8 during their recent meeting in
Canada could not go along with Bush's recipe for "regime change" in
Palestine, i.e. deciding who should and who shouldn't run for elections
for the office Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat holds at present. As some
commentators in Israel pointed out, Bush's speech could have been
written by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon himself.

Reform has been a long-standing internal Palestinian demand, well before
its belated discovery by the Bush administration. Fighting corruption,
accountability at every level, rule of law and regular elections have
been demanded by Palestinians in countless petitions, reports,
demonstrations, and recommendations over the years.

Reform was thwarted for various reasons including the fact that the
"Oslo model" was built on the assumption of the existence of an
authoritarian and corrupt Palestinian regime that was able to deliver
the goods. Before the outbreak of the present conflict, this arrangement
was quite acceptable to various Israeli governments, as long as "final
status" issues were postponed, and settlement and land confiscation
continued.

Before he was assassinated by a right-wing extremist, former prime
minister Yitzhak Rabin put it clearly: the Palestinian Authority (PA)
will govern "without human rights organizations and a supreme court" (lo
Betselem ve lo Bagatz). One pillar of the Oslo model, as an Israeli
commentator put it recently, involved entrusting the PA with policing
its own population in the interest of Israeli security as
"subcontractors in return for personal and economic advancement and
vague political promises" (Ha'aretz, April 18, 2002; emphasis added).

From the point of view of the PA, these "promises and understandings"
were not kept, even though both sides were very close to reaching an
agreement at Taba in January 2001, before former prime minister Ehud
Barak decided to stop the negotiations. Even now, the PA appears willing
to continue playing its former role, provided there is a political
quid-pro-quo.

Therein lies the crux of the matter. Leaving the rhetoric of
demonization aside, Arafat is not a partner from Sharon's point of view
for at least two reasons: First, Sharon understands that Arafat cannot
accept as a final agreement much less than was reached in the
negotiations at Taba, and as summarized in a document prepared by
European Union envoy Miguel Moratinos who was present at the time (text
in Ha'aretz, February 14, 2002).

Second, while it appears in principle possible to arrive at another
"interim" agreement with the PA as Sharon prefers, the fact that Arafat,
from Sharon's point of view, resorted to a form of armed conflict to
"extract" political concessions is not forgivable since, among other
things, it undermines Israel's deterrent military power.

This opinion is also shared by the out-going Chief of Staff, Sha'ul
Mofaz. And in the ringing words of another right-winger, former defense
minister Moshe Arens, Palestinians have to be defeated first so that
"peace" can be made with them. "Reform" and "regime change" are meant as
additional deterrence for any future Palestinian leadership tempted to
stray from the "negotiated process".

The fact of the matter is that significant negotiations have been taking
place throughout the "Oslo process" among different Israeli parties, on
what is acceptable for them to offer the Palestinians. In the present
government, the majority opinion ranges from ethnic cleansing that now
goes by the name of "transfer," to disconnected cantons under Israeli
hegemony.

It is here that the failure of US leadership can be seen most clearly,
reaching an extreme form under the Bush administration. For public
opinion in Israel has been drifting to the right for the past two
decades. As a result, the "Land of Israel" ideology became increasingly
influential in Israeli politics, largely because Israel has been able to
occupy Palestinian land for 35 years with impunity. This was only
possible with US support.

A singular success of Israel as a state has been its ability to
neutralize external pressure. The systematic and dogged work of the
Israel lobby and of Israel's supporters over the years in the US has
been far too successful in pushing various Israeli agendas, to the
detriment of peace, stability, and a fair compromise.

Indeed, the late Yitzhak Rabin was a victim of this success, since it
contributed to the growth of the extreme right wing in Israel, to which
his assassin belonged.

As a result, the Bush Administration has only a domestic agenda as far
as the present conflict is concerned. This, combined with Zionist
messianism marching on with the colonial imperative of redeeming land
and resources from Palestinians, is a sure recipe for continued
conflict. That is why the "peace process" has so far failed.

With or without Arafat, peace will not be achieved unless the US and
Europe press their official position that the West Bank and Gaza are
occupied territories that Israel must evacuate in return for peace.
Nothing short of this will ensure a stable solution. But who is
interested in stability, let alone peace?

