The "Athens Plan                                              ", the
joint Israeli-Palestinian program entitled "Disengagement toward
re-engagement" that is being published for the first time by
bitterlemons, is such an obviously constructive idea that it is painful.
If only the two sides could work together on the security and economic
aspects of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's disengagement plan, its chances
of success would be radically improved and, more importantly, the plan
would be far more likely to serve as a positive precedent for moving
from conflict to constructive separation and ultimately to a successful
two state solution.

A week ago I would have written in this space that, due to the absence
of positive leadership, the plan had little chance of being implemented.
After all, neither Sharon nor PLO leader Yasser Arafat nor US President
George W. Bush has a realistic strategy for peace--in the absence of
which disengagement is liable to be truly unilateral. An Israeli pullout
from Gaza and the northern West Bank may be a positive step from the
standpoint of Israel's need to remain a Jewish and a democratic state,
i.e., from the demographic standpoint, and insofar as it keeps the
two-state solution alive. But it will only serve as a positive precedent
for further Israeli withdrawals or as a point of departure for a return
to peace negotiations if the Palestinian side takes advantage of
Israel's disengagement to restore order and security, thereby enabling
the international community to begin rebuilding the Gazan economy.
That's what the Athens Plan is all about.

Now we confront the possibility that the negative leadership paradigm
described above will be undergoing radical change. In the Palestinian
camp we don't yet know Arafat's fate, but it is certainly possible that
the era of his leadership is ending, and one can at least hope that the
successor regime in Ramallah will better appreciate the opportunity
presented by disengagement as well as the relevancy of the actions,
described in the Athens Plan, that need to be taken in order for
Palestinians to benefit from Israel's departure.

In the United States, a Kerry presidency or even a second term Bush
presidency presents an opportunity for the administration to deal more
constructively and more energetically with the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Only in Israel was it made clear last week that no leadership
change is about to take place, as Ariel Sharon rebuffed the right wing
challenge to his initiative to leave the Gaza Strip and northern West Bank.

Sharon's stubborn commitment to disengagement is striking. But he is
invoking his plan at least in part because he does not want, indeed,
does not believe in, a peace process with the Palestinians. And his
intentions regarding the rest of the West Bank remain murky, to say the
least, thereby sparking endless conspiracy theories among Palestinians.
Nevertheless, his disengagement plan is potentially good for Israel and
good for Palestine.

If Sharon were soon to be confronted by a new, more moderate and
rational Palestinian leadership and a more determined US administration,
he would be hard put to rebuff pressures at least to enter into some
sort of disengagement-related dialogue. This in turn would seriously
improve the domestic Israeli political chances that disengagement would
actually be carried out, insofar as some of the Israeli disengagement
skeptics, even on the right, object precisely to the absence of a
partner rather than to leaving Gaza. The Athens Plan is a timely and
suitable agenda for such a dialogue. The Palestinians who wrote it
evidently understand that disengagement is more an opportunity than a
conspiracy.

True, this is a best-case scenario. The situation in both Palestine and
Washington might not play out this way. Arafat could recover and return,
or Palestine could deteriorate into Somalia-like chaos, or Hamas or
Palestinian warlords could launch a series of coups, or the successor
regime in Ramallah could be too weak to act decisively--the list of
potential negative scenarios is endless. And the next US administration
might remain so preoccupied with Iraq and perhaps Iran that it will
refuse to exercise pressure or offer incentives to either side in order
to make good on disengagement.

But the fact that six distinguished Israelis and five distinguished
Palestinians sat down and worked out a comprehensive agenda for
exploiting disengagement in order to implement Israeli-Palestinian
reengagement, offers at least a grain of hope that we can now begin
moving in the right direction.

