The deterioration in Palestinian-Israeli relations that has put us back
into the vicious circle of violence and ended the implementation of the
first phase of the roadmap
                                                 has also once again
focused attention on the American role in this conflict. Most
Palestinian politicians and analysts, and some on the Israeli side, have
blamed the United States (although not only the United States) for the
recent collapse. What magnified American responsibility for the failure
to implement the roadmap was US insistence that it take sole
responsibility for the monitoring role that is a crucial component of
the roadmap plan.

The roadmap began as a Quartet-crafted document that reflected a
compromise understanding between the divergent views of Quartet
members--Russia, the United Nations, the European Union and the United
States. But when the actual implementation began, the Bush
administration pushed the other Quartet members aside and gave them the
impression that it would take the lead in supervising roadmap
implementation. It is no surprise, then, that the US is widely seen as
responsible for the roadmap's failure.

Certainly, the recent increase in US attention to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict is related largely to the difficulties
American policy is facing in the Middle East region. The significant
decline in credibility that the US has experienced as a result of this
conflict, the war in Iraq, and also its actions in some Islamic states,
is pushing the American administration to try to offset the slide in
credibility by acting as peacemaker between Palestinians and Israelis.
As a result, the collapse in Palestinian-Israeli relations and the
subsequent eruption of violence coinciding with the dramatic swing in
tension in Iraq is having a negative impact on US public opinion about
Bush administration policies. We can only expect, then, that the
government will have to do its best to prevent Palestinian-Israeli
relations from slipping off the abyss. That begs the question, however,
as to whether the US will proceed along the right path, and in a manner
that takes into consideration lessons from the past.

Two general deficiencies have characterized the US approach as it
attempted to implement the roadmap in recent months. These are the
inability to understand and compensate for the traditional power
imbalance between Israel and the Palestinians, as well as a superficial
American understanding of internal Palestinian politics. While there
remains a slim chance of salvaging the roadmap from this dramatic
deterioration, that chance rests on the extent and quality of political
capital that the administration is willing to invest.

As such, three words of advice might come in handy. First, it is still
possible to reinstate the ceasefire, provided that this cessation of
violence is mutual on the part of both Palestinians and Israelis and
stems from each side's adherence to that early clause of the roadmap
that calls for Palestinians and Israelis to declare an end to all
violence anywhere against the other.

Second, all components of the first phase of the roadmap should more or
less be implemented in parallel: steps in security, political reforms,
troop withdrawal, a settlement freeze and dismantlement, and the
reinstatement of Palestinian institutions in Jerusalem, etc. The
sequential approach, which is the Israeli approach, is fatal.

Third, the United States government should refrain from the deep
interference in internal Palestinian politics that has characterized
recent weeks and show more respect for Palestinian law, the constitution
and democratic processes. Recent US interference in the form of public
statements and practical interventions has only backfired. 

