Q: How would you gauge the American public mood
vis-a-vis the Palestinian-Israeli conflict?

A: The major issues are Iraq and the economy. Coverage of
Palestine shows how bad the wall is, for example, but does not criticize
[Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon nor is it supportive of the Geneva
initiative.

Q: Do you see ways that this public mood is playing
into the run-up to the elections?

A: The problem is that we know what the position of the
Republicans is concerning the conflict. We have the experience of the
past three years of [President George W.] Bush, with his being so
supportive of Sharon and allowing the Israeli government basically to do
what it does best. For Palestinians, this has been quite one-sided and
catastrophic, and actually in contrast with previous US positions.

From the Democrats, we are not hearing what they would do and what might
be the alternative. There is some backstage work in support of the
Geneva initiative, things that you don't hear about in the press and
mostly in academic and policymaking circles. But as far as the Democrats
are concerned, there seems to be no real position.

Q: What about independent candidates, such as Ralph Nader?

A: This has not yet seemed to take off. A lot of people have
been surprised as to why Ralph Nader is not yet on the scene.

One big concern in the US is what to do with the Patriot Act. An
alternative voice will be one that tries to tackle the issue of
September 11 legislation that very badly hit the Arab-American
community, among them Palestinians. Many are in detention, are being
deported, so civil rights issues are on the agenda if you are on a
progressive platform.

And as always in the US, foreign issues are not campaign issues.
Americans are much more concerned with domestic issues or major issues
like the war, which involves US soldiers. There is starting to be real
opposition to the war; everyday two are three soldiers are being killed,
and that is really having an effect on people here.

Q: With a Republican agenda so supportive of Sharon,
how do you explain the hundreds of millions of dollars in loan
guarantees held back because Israel continues to build the wall?

A: It is my understanding that this is a diplomatic move to say
that "we are not fully supportive of all Sharon does," but that the
United States is still not ready to throw its strength against a
different position. This is a tactical position, not a genuine change in
position. And we are talking about taxpayers' money going to a wall that
will only create more refugees--that doesn't really support the US
peacekeeping mission in the world.

Q: What do you think will be the impact of the
elections on the situation on the ground in Palestine?

A: Perhaps that is the question that is most difficult to
answer. It is very scary for all of us here--Palestinians, activists for
Palestine and people on a higher level--the positions that the United
States has taken. The Republicans are getting a lot of criticism on
Iraq--it's not working, it's backfiring--and they are getting a lot of
criticism from the Europeans.

But my suspicion is that the Republicans will be reelected. That will be
a carte blanche for their politics in Iraq, and that will mean they will
then allow Israel to do whatever it wants to do. The Likud is very
strong here, and their financiers are very strong.

If the Democrats were to win, I think their solution would be to find a
way out of Iraq very quickly and then perhaps to return to the agenda of
the Clinton era and perhaps be more firm with Israel (although I don't
really know what firm is). Firm seems to be saying that you are not
going to give money [to Israel] for the wall, but at the same time
giving a great deal of money for settlements.

But I also think that people in Palestine are waiting to see what
happens in Iraq to know what will happen in Palestine. Iraq is
dominating the agenda.

