Some parts of United States President George W. Bush's speech were
predictable. He stuck to generalities that would not commit him and the
prestige of his presidency to any specific involvement in solving the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which he does not view as a vital US
interest. In anticipation of approaching mid-term elections in the US,
Bush emphasized "motherhood and apple pie" values, such as democracy in
the Palestinian Authority and security for Israel, that would find favor
with the electorate, and avoided issues, such as immediate pressure on
Israel to stop the spread of settlements, that might antagonize
important hard-line elements within the pro-Israel lobby.

It also made sense for President Bush to integrate the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict into his overall world view on combating
terrorism and the American role therein, which, after all, has become
the dominant theme of his administration. His closing biblical quote, "I
have set before you life and death, therefore choose life," was a
particularly timely response to Palestinian suicide bombers. In this
regard, too, harsh criticism of Yasir Arafat was to be expected, given
PM Sharon's broad success in discrediting the Palestinian leader as a
terrorist and a pathological liar. This was balanced to some extent by
Bush's reiteration of constant themes in the US approach to the conflict
since 1967: Israel's presence in the territories is "occupation"; it
will be resolved in accordance with United Nations Security Council
Resolution 242. This also showed the Europeans and the Arabs that the
president is sensitive to their need to resolve the conflict.

But there were other major items in the Bush presentation that appeared
to suffer from a lack of logic and consistency.

By focusing on the need to remove Arafat by democratic means and
radically reform the Palestinian Authority, the president appeared to be
taking on a mission impossible. His pointed demands upon the Palestinian
public are likely to make it harder, not easier, to accomplish these
tasks. His call for "a new constitution which separates the powers of
government" ignores the fact that such a constitution exists--it was
drafted in the mid-90s with the advice of American NGOs--and several
weeks ago was finally signed by Arafat, under pressure from liberal
Palestinian activists, along with additional reforms.

This is not to imply that the current efforts of Palestinian reformers
that Bush ignores will necessarily have any lasting effect. Arafat
remains in control, and in democratic elections, now scheduled for
January, he will almost certainly be reelected. Alternatively, if Arafat
is removed from power, his successor is more than likely to be an
extremist or to adopt extreme policies merely in order to hold onto
power. Nor are security for Israelis and an end to terrorism--major
topics of emphasis in Bush's presentation--likely to be achieved in this
way.

This is particularly so in view of the president's reluctance to offer
the Palestinians any immediate incentives to do his bidding.
Palestinians must take as an article of faith that if they depose their
legally-elected leader and cease the violence, Bush will then compel
Sharon to deliver on territories and East Jerusalem and to dismantle
settlements--all constant elements of the American vision of peace and
all concessions that Sharon has vowed never to make.

Bush offers no clear vision of the end objective of the process except a
democratic Palestine; no constructive guidelines other than a three year
deadline seemingly divorced from reality; no demands upon Israel other
than those of the still-born Mitchell Report; no international
conference (an American-backed idea until recently); no mention at all
of the recent forward-looking ideas presented by the Saudis and
Egyptians and endorsed by the Arab League; no real American role--in
short, no road map for getting from here to there.

At an abstract level, Bush is justified in demanding the dismissal of
Arafat and the cessation of the violence he has fostered without
"trade-offs" and "compensation". But Middle East politics do not work in
the abstract. Indeed, if Bush's message is that a Palestinian state can
only be reconciled with Israeli security by deposing Arafat, then it is
more likely that it will be interpreted by Prime Minister Sharon--whose
six visits to Washington in 15 months paid off with this speech--as a
green light for Israel to remove the Palestinian leader by force, with
potentially violent and escalatory consequences.

An alternative operational conclusion that appears to emerge from Bush's
speech is that the US will now spearhead a search for a suitable
successor to Arafat, a Palestinian "Karzai." How could such a candidate
credibly be installed in power? With Israeli armed protection? With
Egyptian, Saudi and Jordanian blessings? Not very likely.

Until now it was clear that neither of the two principals to the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute, Sharon and Arafat, had a coherent and
realistic peace policy. The bottom line from Bush's speech is that the
only conceivable third party that might be able to intervene and compel
Israelis and Palestinians to return to a peace process--President
Bush--also has no coherent and realistic peace policy.

