George Papandreous was almost in a trance dancing, surrounded by
cheering supporters. This was Greece, in the summer, and I had accepted
an invitation from the UCLA to participate in a brain storming session
on the hot topic of the day, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's
disengagement plan, with a handful of prominent Israelis and
Palestinians and hosted by a distinguished American scholar. Personally,
I also wanted to breathe some fresh air, even if hot, as opposed to the
suffocating atmosphere in Gaza.

We had little time to enjoy the beautiful beaches of Porto Heli, but we
enjoyed the warm Greek hospitality and one breezy evening we were in for
a special treat when we were invited to meet the charismatic Papandreous
who is not only an accomplished politician but also a keen folk dancer.
While George danced like Zorba, my mind went back to my first night in
Athens in 1965 when I arrived as representative of the executive board
of the Palestinian Students Union, had my first taste of Ouzo and woke
up with a headache and Frank Sinatra singing "Strangers in the Night".
That was back in the dying days of colonialism when an exciting world
was bursting with liberation movements.

In our first session, Professor Steven L. Spiegel opened the discussion
by asking for opening statements. The Israeli participants, almost as
one, proceeded to express their belief that the disengagement plan was
an opportunity to salvage the peace process. For my part, I expressed my
reservations about Sharon's intentions. Two Israeli delegates, however,
dismissed the question as irrelevant. It was as if I had entered into a
discussion of metaphysics in the company of a group of logical
positivists. "Why bother ourselves with intentions?" one friend
exclaimed. "All that matters is that he is going to leave Gaza." And, in
a tone I imagine preachers have used down the centuries, he added, "you
should hang on to this opportunity or you will again miss a chance as
you have so many times."

We on the Palestinian side were not in a good mood. We were exhausted,
bewildered and wounded. We knew that we were losing ground by the day,
as well as land. We knew that we have given Sharon all he needs in terms
of excuses and justifications to kill and destroy in the name of
fighting terror. We were deeply disturbed, not only because we had left
our people behind in big and small prisons, but because we realized that
our just cause of liberation was being twisted and abused so that we had
to defend ourselves not just against the oppression of the occupation
but against the "terrorist" label. We knew that we were in a serious
mess, because of Sharon as well as our internal polarization.

So, very quickly we moved on to the practical meaning of the
disengagement plan and what might be requested from us to turn it into
an opportunity. We left the "metaphysical" question of intentions and
talked about economics, the settlements, the elections, and of course,
security. After two days of discussions we were ready for a draft paper,
now published under the title "The Athens Plan
                                             ". It calls for the
Palestinian Authority to unite its security forces and proceed with the
elections. It calls for major economic rehabilitation and development
with an emphasis on the Arab and European roles. Above all it asserts
the position that the disengagement plan can only be successful if it is
part of the roadmap.

Nonetheless, I left Greece with my lingering question about Sharon's
intentions. And then, in early October, in a Haaretz interview with a
close confidante and top advisor to Sharon, Dov Weissglas pops up and
candidly tells the whole world that the intention of the disengagement
plan is to freeze the peace process, to prevent the establishment of a
Palestinian state and to postpone indefinitely any questions of land,
Jerusalem, borders and refugees.

For the last four years former Israeli premier Ehud Barak, Sharon and US
president George W. Bush have worked hard to spread the slogan that
there is no Palestinian partner to peace. Now I have a question: Who
destroyed the Palestinian Authority and kept pounding its infrastructure
every time there was a Hamas suicide bombing? This is a question that
will strike Sharon in the face if President Yasser Arafat is leaving the
political field. The question will soon be, is there an Israeli partner
for peace?

