The United States is failing in its mission to implement the roadmap
                                                 and the Bush vision of
June 24, 2002                                             , and to
establish a viable Palestinian state alongside a secure Israel.

This was not inevitable: as an election year approaches and the US sinks
deeper into the Iraqi morass, Washington is simply not prepared to give
high enough priority to the Israeli-Palestinian issue.

There are multiple dimensions to this failure. One is the shallowness of
US intervention. Looking back over the past three decades, it is
apparent that American involvement in the Arab-Israel conflict was
successful when it manifested itself in the prolonged presence in the
region--over weeks and even months of shuttling back and forth and
sitting exclusively with the parties--of a strong US secretary of state
(Henry Kissinger in 1974-75, James Baker in 1990-91) with a clear
presidential mandate, or of a president himself (Jimmy Carter in
1978-79, nailing down the Israel-Egypt peace treaty).

True, President Clinton failed in a similar venture in 2000, and it was
his abortive high profile involvement at Camp David and thereafter that
deterred President George W. Bush and his aides and influenced the
current administration's initial "hands off" policy. But once Bush did
commit--presumably assessing that between Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon and Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) he had
enough good leadership material to work with--his only possible route to
success was to follow in the footsteps of presidents Nixon, Ford and
Bush senior, all Republicans, and empower a very senior American
official to "camp out" in Jerusalem and Ramallah until the job was done.
He refused.

One reason is the impending presidential elections of November 2004.
Bush needs Jewish and right wing Christian votes and funds, and the
lobbying organizations of those communities have signaled him to lay off
and not pressure Sharon on key issues like settlements. Yet even this
does not explain why he did not until recently attempt to galvanize
greater pressure on the Palestinian Authority to dismantle the terrorist
infrastructure. His negligence on both issues--and his alternative
preoccupation with prisoner release and the "wall", both non-roadmap
issues--appear to reflect bad advice at the strategic level concerning
the necessary priorities. It also bespeaks a lack of presidential
understanding of the damage rendered to US interests in the region by
the prolongation of this conflict and by the expansion of
settlements--dynamics that ultimately are liable to destroy Israel as a
democratic and Jewish state.

This brings us to the real current US preoccupation in the Middle East:
Iraq and its dilemmas. The elimination of the Saddam Hussein regime was
supposed to usher in a new era of democracy and weapons of mass
destruction (WMD) reduction in the region, and to facilitate Arab-Israel
peace. Thus far it has failed spectacularly. No less distressing is the
US failure in intelligence gathering and analysis and post-war planning
that lies behind the present Iraq fiasco. These setbacks damage American
prestige and deterrence, hence American peacemaking capabilities, in the
region.

They also determine Washington's order of priorities for the coming
months. With the US losing more than a soldier a day in Iraq, searching
desperately for international partners to shoulder part of the burden,
and seemingly incapable of stanching the growing violence, the choice is
clear. In the Israeli-Palestinian arena, the administration will avoid
high profile involvement and spin or cut its losses while empowering
Sharon to continue and even escalate his war on terrorism--all in order
to minimize public pressure from critical constituencies.

At the same time, the administration will go all out to show some
results in Iraq, where it cannot back out without risking a severe
electoral setback in 2004, and where the fallout from failure is
strategically more critical, insofar as it could negatively influence
global terrorism, WMD proliferation, vital energy resources and friendly
regional regimes, including Israel. Nor have we even mentioned the rest
of the "axis of evil": the administration has to be ready to deal with
escalating nuclear challenges from Iran and North Korea, possibly in the
coming months.

The financial side of this choice is staggering: the US is already
spending in one month in Iraq alone considerably more than it spends in
aid to Israel and the PA in a year; it is spending annually in Iraq
about twice the sum that President Clinton contemplated spending on
Israeli-Palestinian peace (refugee resettlement, desalination,
additional security for Israel) over ten years.

Given these American priorities, it is hard to understand the
pronouncement of Israel Defense Forces Chief of Staff Yaalon that
"everything [concerning the Israeli-Palestinian conflict] depends on
Bush." At the daily, tactical level of financial and diplomatic
pressures this might be true. But at the broader strategic level very
little currently depends on Bush, because Bush does not really intend to
risk very much here. 

