Common wisdom, sometimes laced with a degree of malice, has it that the
US cannot do much to help the peace process along in an election year,
let alone an election year as contentious and tense as 2004 promises to
be: "no president would antagonize American Jews by imposing a solution
on Israel, when he is up for re-election."

There is, of course--as in all effective distortions--a kernel of
informative truth in this assertion. No US president--in an election
year, or any year--would gladly antagonize an active and highly
committed and mobilized community. Moreover, being attentive to the
legitimate needs of Israel--for reasons which combine good strategic
sense, a commonality of values, and shrewd political calculation--is by
now "as American as apple pie," and has been a mainstay of policy for
every administration, at least since President John F. Kennedy first
defined this as a special relationship. After all, there is little left
of the artificial lines separating foreign and domestic policy. North
Atlantic Treaty Organization expansion, policy on AIDS in Africa,
relations with Mexico all have merit, but were also influenced by the
support and active advocacy of important and pertinent American
constituencies.

And yet, this in itself is not the whole story, or even the most
important factor. Considerations related to "the Jewish vote" are
neither the first nor the fourth reason why the US will /not/ impose a
solution:

      1. To begin with, American policy in general--indeed, the basic
      concepts underlying the new "industry" of mediation, based on US
      practices--rejects the prospect of externally imposed solutions,
      which will always be, by definition, unpopular and brittle.
      Experience has shown that a strong and stable outcome can only
      emerge if the two sides learn to listen to each other's needs, not
      steer them into a collision course with an external power.

      2. Moreover, in the specific Arab-Israel context, American
      administrations--ever since President Eisenhower came to regret
      the pressure on Prime Minister Ben Gurion to withdraw from Sinai
      without peace in 1957--have come to the conclusion that an overly
      intrusive role by the US makes peace less likely to happen. Given
      the basic asymmetry of the situation, it tends to play up Arab
      expectations, and thus reduces the prospects for meaningful
      compromise. Hence the famous statement by Secretary of State James
      Baker, back in 1989, that the US cannot want peace more than the
      sides themselves, and will not "deliver" Israel.

      3. Any US commitment to support some Palestinian aspiration, at
      the present time, must first be based on a Palestinian
      commitment--to decide which side they are on in the war on
      terrorism, and to act accordingly. Until they do, they cannot
      appeal for a US role--and then complain bitterly that the
      president is openly calling for a new Palestinian leadership and
      refuses to do any further business with Yasser Arafat.

      4. Finally, the US will not be swept into a position in which it
      agrees to bypass the Israeli political process. Respect for the
      outcome of a democratic vote is a profound American value.

American Jews love peace. Every other synagogue, congregation or temple
carries the term "shalom" in its name. And yet for these four reasons,
they stand guard against the temptation of choosing the option of
American coercion--and will continue to do so in the future. A great
majority among them feels that coercion cannot serve as a "shortcut" to
peace. Today, as ever, they are able to influence policy only when the
broad outlines of their positions fit comfortably with general American
interests and values. Thus, they will support and even demand some
Israeli "give" on controversial questions, such as the settlements; but
will always back Israel on security and identity issues, such as the
fence, the "right of return," and above all, the status of Jerusalem. On
all of these issues, they can expect their sensibilities to be in line
with those of the majority of Americans, as represented by the US
Congress.

