Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's disengagement plan has recently
been the subject of all kinds of debates within Israeli and Palestinian
circles, and between Israelis and Palestinians. The main problem facing
all parties to these debates, however, is that the plan has so far been,
first vague, offering little detail to allow proper analysis, and second
it has changed over time as a result of Israeli government infighting
between supporters of the plan and those who oppose it. For example, the
text that was recently approved in the Knesset was not exactly the text
that was presented to US President George W. Bush and as a result of
which the latter gave his famous assurances to Sharon.

Notwithstanding this, the reaction of most significant international
players, including the US, to the disengagement plan has been
diplomatic. Most countries have tried to avoid being negative by
focusing on the need for this plan to be a step toward implementing the
roadmap.

But is that possible? Palestinians in these ongoing debates have been
basing their objections to the plan specifically on the argument that it
contradicts the roadmap, for example on the issue of settlements. While
the disengagement plan involves, in principle, a withdrawal from
settlements in Gaza and four in the northern West Bank, which is
encouraging, the continued expansion of illegal Jewish settlements in
the vast majority of the rest of the occupied territories, as well as
repeated statements from many Israeli leaders on the subject, are
evidence that the disengagement plan is really about the preservation
and expansion of settlements and not vice versa. The roadmap, of course,
calls for a complete cessation of all kinds of settlement activity in
any part of occupied territory. It is hard, therefore, to see how the
two can go hand in hand.

The Athens Plan                                               seems to
be falling into the same trap that most previous attempts to mediate
between the two sides have fallen into. The plan again confuses cause
and effect, because it implicitly expects the Palestinian side to
fulfill certain security responsibilities "to combat subversion and
terrorism and keep law and order" in order that "subject to
implementation of all Palestinian commitments Israel should end all
targeted assassinations and military incursions into Gaza and the West
Bank."

It seems to me that the security situation the Palestinian side suffers
from, especially in the Gaza Strip as well as in certain places in the
West Bank, specifically Jenin and Nablus, is a result of two things:
First are the continuous incursions, assassinations, arrest campaigns,
house demolitions, confiscation of land, settlement expansions and the
rest of the Israeli practices against the Palestinian people, practices,
it is well to bear in mind, that have been imposed throughout the
history of the occupation. Second is the increase in poverty and the
dire economic situation that has arisen in the occupied territories as a
result of the collective punishments Israel has meted out, including the
restrictions on movement and closures of towns and cities, etc.

Another general observation is that the Athens Plan neglects the fact
that Gaza is not a different country from the West Bank. Both areas are
part of the same homeland for the same people. It is futile to expect
that the continuing Israeli practices, specifically the consolidation of
the occupation in the West Bank, will not be perceived as a provocation
that would require all kinds of reactions by Palestinians whether they
are in Gaza or elsewhere.

The heart of the matter is that the current Israeli government has a
problem with the roadmap because the roadmap is about ending the
occupation. This government, on the contrary, is trying in many ways,
including through the so-called disengagement plan, to consolidate the
occupation. Until an Israeli government is willing to accept, at least
to start with in principle, that lasting and comprehensive peace with
Palestinians will require a commitment to completely end the occupation,
it is difficult to be optimistic that any significant improvements in
the situation will occur.

The most immediate, practical (since it carries no security aspect to
it) and significant signal that an Israeli government can send that it
is serious about improving the situation, is to halt settlement activity
in all its forms and in all the occupied territories.

