Military occupation and armed conflict breed human rights violations. So
does non-democratic and corrupt government. Inevitably, the very nature
of occupation, conflict and governmental corruption renders it difficult
to address and rectify the violations.

There are many highly dedicated and skilled individuals and
organizations on both sides of the Israel-Palestine conflict, and among
concerned third parties, who seek to remedy these human rights
violations and to educate to prevent them. Obviously, they deserve our
support. From a strategic standpoint - one that deals not directly with
human rights but rather with the entirety of the conflict - the question
is: what is the best way to do this? Where should resources and efforts
be concentrated in order to bring about a truly radical improvement in
the human rights situation in the Israel-Palestine arena?

This question begs another: whose human rights? Through the good works
of Israeli, Palestinian and international organizations and journalists
we are familiar with the state of human rights violations perpetrated by
Israelis against Palestinians: problems of detention, house demolitions,
excesses by Israeli forces at roadblocks and elsewhere, health and
education deprivation, restrictions on freedom of movement, etc.
Incidentally, all Israeli governments have also to one extent or another
violated the rights of Palestinian citizens of Israel, an area that is
clearly conflict related.

Then there are the settlers who claim that the government's intention of
dismantling their settlements violates their human rights and
constitutes "transfer". Many Israelis and all Palestinians are not
impressed with this argument, even though the settlers, many of whom
acted in good faith in accepting government incentives to live in the
territories, deserve fair treatment and compensation unless they opt for
violence.

At the other end of the spectrum, there are the Israeli civilian victims
of indiscriminate Palestinian suicide bombings and other forms of
terrorism. Obviously, their human rights too were violated. Few
Palestinians have focused on this issue in human rights terms, even
though it has been a moving force in Israeli policy decisions, like
building the fence, that in turn have seriously affected Palestinian
human rights. And then there are the wholesale violations of human
rights of Palestinian citizens by their own government, a reflection of
the dismal rights situation throughout the Arab world, but also, in our
case, of the complex social and political history of modern Palestine.
Finally, in the Palestinian context, the suicide bombings themselves,
with their aura of heroism among Palestinian youth lining up to put on
explosive vests, turn the entire issue on its head: what is the
relevance of human rights when members of one camp glorify their own
suicides among a crowd of civilians from the other?

Obviously, the optimal approach to human rights in this conflict is a
comprehensive one that seeks to deal with all the violated rights of all
concerned on both sides. Essentially, the human rights advocates argue
that ways must be found for Israelis and Palestinians to wage a cleaner
war, one that deprives fewer non-combatants of their basic human rights.
A lot of human and financial resources are devoted toward this end, with
considerable international support.

But is this the best allocation of these resources? A number of active
participants in the international aid effort to provide basic
Palestinian needs in terms of nourishment, medication and education
under harsh conditions of combat and occupation argue that in so doing
they are filling a function that international law actually demands of
Israel; hence they are merely prolonging the Israeli occupation. Cease
the international donor effort, they propose: in the short term many
Palestinians will suffer more; but Israel, when confronted with
international pressure to feed hundreds of thousands of Palestinians on
its own, will end the occupation that much sooner.

This is a problematic proposition. A boycott by the international aid
community might just as easily oblige Israel, with its overriding
security concerns, to renew full occupation in areas "A" that it has
hitherto generally entered only fleetingly. This will hardly enhance
Palestinians' human rights. But the intellectual exercise of considering
this option does highlight the centrality of the conflict in the human
rights equation.

Indeed, it brings us full circle, back to the broad strategic level. Is
it not conceivable that, given the option of deploying diplomatic and
other resources in one direction or another, the appropriate approach
would be to devote resources toward ending the occupation and the
conflict rather than toward mitigating human rights violations under
conditions of conflict? If there is no occupation at all, Israelis won't
be violating Palestinian human rights and Palestinian terrorism against
Israelis will at least decrease, if not end.

This formulation may sound simplistic, but it is an important statement
of priorities for this writer and like-minded people. It means that even
a comprehensive unilateral withdrawal that falls short of peace
constitutes a huge step toward improving human rights on both sides. 

