Like the battered wife who returns again and again to her violent
husband because "this time he really promised" to behave, so the roadmap
                                                 takes us back once
again to a course that always ends up badly. But with one difference:
this time the violent husband isn't even making empty promises to
behave. The empty promise is being made in his name by America.

And if until now it was somehow possible to close our eyes and not see
this syndrome repeating itself again and again--the process that is
supposed to lead to peace always precipitating a new outbreak of
Palestinian violence, terror and bloodshed, until it consumes itself,
and so on and on--after the last two years we can no longer avoid the
question: why did the Palestinians initiate such a violent and
determined war precisely when former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak
and they had reached the phase of end of occupation, removal of
settlements and the establishment of a Palestinian state?

I know the answers that the fanatical Israeli left likes to give itself,
followed of course in turn by all Israel-haters throughout the world: we
are guilty. Barak and US President Bill Clinton did not prepare properly
for Camp David II; they insulted Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. If
only Barak had addressed him with greater warmth and given him a little
more time to bargain, after all, you know that this is what a man of the
East requires. And he didn't really offer him 96 percent, only 93. And
besides, lest we forget, Sharon went up on the Temple Mount and ignited
the entire region.

Not only are these not intelligent answers, nor even sad excuses, but
they embody something far more grave: a deep denigration of the
Palestinians. Would we declare war because someone did not treat Arik
Sharon (or even the distinguished Shimon Peres) nicely? Does a people
embark on a course of killing and being killed with such brutality
because of an argument over three or five percent of the territory (most
of which it could have gained by bargaining at the negotiating table)?

If you cannot give an intelligent answer to this question, then you
cannot draw a roadmap for peace in the Middle East. One way or the
other, the farthest thing from intelligent behavior is when at one and
the same time you are unable to explain why thus far the road has caused
us to crash, yet you propose once again to take the same road without
any appreciable change.

Here is an unpleasant but possible explanation: According to the
Palestinian (and general Arab) view, Israel is a colonialist entity of
people who came from Europe, invaded a country that did not belong to
them, cast out its legal owners and settled in their place. Israel could
not exist as a bone stuck in the throat of the Arab nation and a thorn
in the side of Islam were it not for the support of the wealthy
colonialist West, which has always sought to exploit the resources of
the suppressed portion of humanity. Within this context of classic
exploitation and suppression, Israel is a vehicle used by the West to
rule the Holy Land and its tourist resources. With all our empathy for
the Jews after what Hitler did to them, it is still unreasonable and
unjust for the wealthy West to solve their problem by destroying our
dream, our villages and our cities. The very creation of Israel was an
immoral act, and there can be no more just aspiration than to turn back
the clock and return Palestine to the status that preceded the Zionist
invasion.

I did not invent this diatribe. It is written in hundreds of thousands
of books, newspapers and internet sites, spoken in tens of thousands of
meetings and conventions, studied endlessly in schools, sermonized every
Friday in a million mosques. And confronting this huge tidal wave that
assails the Arab consciousness day and night from every direction, there
sails a little dinghy that declaims a mild political declaration, heard
once every few years as if under duress, concerning recognition of the
principle of two states for the two peoples. The Oslo system and the
roadmap postpone the confrontation between the tidal wave and the dinghy
to the greatest extent possible. Israeli withdrawal, a settlement
freeze, additional territory and authority for the Palestinians, even a
handshake and cooperation--all these can be neatly interpreted both as
steps toward peace and reconciliation and as stages in the big act of
turning back the clock and correcting the historical injustice.

This system of postponement has not proven itself. Every time we have
reached the moment of confrontation, along came the tidal wave and
overturned the dinghy. The only innovation of the roadmap is that it
postpones the moment of confrontation to a greater extent than all its
predecessors. In other words, it swamps the dinghy at a time when
huddled on its deck are thousands of victims.

