The Israeli government's acceptance of the roadmap
                                                , despite all of the
accompanying reservations, can be considered a significant development
in the recent state of affairs. First, it may mark a return in
Palestinian-Israeli relations from violent confrontation to peaceful
negotiations. Second, given the immense incompatibility between the
framework of the roadmap (i.e. ending the occupation of 1967 and
stopping settlement expansion) and the ideology and political mentality
of the Israeli leadership, this roadmap acceptance indicates that no
matter how obstinate the Israeli government is on a given issue, the
United States government can always influence change in the Israeli
position.

In that regard, there is no doubt that we are now witnessing a
transformation in the American administration's attitude towards the
Middle East conflict, demonstrated through a heightened level of
Israeli-Palestinian contacts, the intensive and direct involvement of
the president and other senior officials, and a position more consistent
with international law. These changes in American behavior are driven by
three motives. The first is that Israel was given the opportunity by the
US to end the conflict by force. The avoidance heretofore by the
Americans of new political initiatives had the effect of allowing the
Israelis to continue their military campaign unhindered. But Israel has
now proven that attempting to crush Palestinian steadfastness and
resistance cannot achieve its objectives of peace and security.

The second American motive is regional, whereby US Middle East policy in
the post-Iraq war era must be balanced to offset US policy in Iraq,
which has been met by a great deal of Arab resentment. The United
States, which is perceived as an occupier in Iraq, wants to end another
occupation that is key in the eyes of the Arab public. The third
motivation is international, and simply reflects the growing American
realization that Middle East instability is closely linked to hatred,
violence and terrorism, all of which threaten United States security and
the security of American friends and allies. Inasmuch as a resolution in
Palestine is important to the stability of the Middle East, Washington
wants to engender that resolution.

This window of opportunity is a real one that demands exploitation by
the peace camps in Israel and Palestine. Recent developments have
produced a more conducive atmosphere towards peace, demonstrating
Palestinian readiness and American enthusiasm. It remains to be seen,
however, to what extent and for how long the US administration will
continue to invest the level of energy required to move the peace
process forward. The coming US elections loom as an advancing
distraction and this new window of opportunity may not prove long enough
to reestablish trust. But one can only commiserate with the Americans
thus far, as we have seen how stubborn even the first barriers have
been: bringing Israel to make the first step, repudiate violence and
recognize the roadmap's fundamental principles.

