Q: A new draft elections law was crafted recently for the
Palestinian Legislative Council. What are the features of that draft?

A: This new draft law is concerned with the general context and
the developments that have occurred on the ground. As such, the proposed
draft allows the Legislative Council to enter the coming elections in
the context of numerous perspectives--Palestinian, Israeli and
international.

Previous experiences were evaluated in order to address the obstacles
facing the PLC resulting from the electoral system and the old elections
law (Law Number 13, 1995), which was the basis for the 1996 elections.
That [law], especially the elections protocol (Appendix Two in the
agreements signed on September 28, 1995 in Washington), emphasized
Palestinian-Israeli agreements.

Q: Why have these changes been proposed at this
particular time? Are there problems with the old law, or does this
relate to developments on the ground?

A: The new legal situation led us to review some of the old
clauses, which eventually led to the presentation of a completely new
draft law. The PLC approved that draft law during its session on Sunday,
September 1 after a general reading, and then it was transferred to the
Legal Committee for preparation for the first reading.

The impetus for this draft was that the old elections statute was based
on a system of lists of individual nominations, and open lists, and
immediate election for any number [of candidates] within the set
ceiling. The nominees with the most votes won.

The new statute, however, is based on relative representation for lists
of parties and blocs. This will encourage political activity and
increase the importance of political parties in the PLC. This is
necessary in order to transfer the mechanisms of revolution into that of
civil society based on pluralism and political parties. It also requires
the holding of regular elections every four years, contrary to the old
law that tied the Council's term to the interim period [of
Palestinian-Israeli agreements].

Q: Is it possible to hold elections, even if the proposed
draft of the new law is approved, in light of the developments on the
ground?

A: Even before September 28, 2000 and the outbreak of the Al Aqsa
Intifada and the beginning of the comprehensive Israeli aggressions
against the Palestinian people, the authority and their institutions,
Palestinian elections were a public demand--even as the Palestinian
Authority was procrastinating on holding public elections. There was a
mentality in the leadership that didn't believe in institutionalized
work. Rather, it held the conviction that direct administration of this
"project" would strengthen its power over the political system.

Since the Intifada, however, and with the new, dangerous developments of
the last two years, there are other parties that now have a relationship
and an opinion on these things. These changes have altered the
priorities of the average citizen.

Q: How does the involvement of parties other than
Palestinians affect the elections process?

A: Today the elections are seen as an instrument in the process of
struggle, and not as an end in themselves.

Israel, represented by its prime minister, looks at the Palestinian
elections as a means of ending the Palestinian Authority and the
resistance and erasing the Oslo Accords and abrogating them. Ariel
Sharon does not hide his animosity to these agreements, but for reasons
of international public opinion he does not announce his position
frankly--but he is quite active on the ground.

Sharon is floundering between two positions: allowing the holding of
elections and how to deal with them if they are held. If he were to
reveal his position, he would be forced to accept their results,
including the reelection of [Palestinian President Yasser] Arafat. If he
refuses, the changes in the elections law will force him to negotiate
with the Authority and that will not be acceptable to him.

Q: How is the international community involved in the
elections process?

A: International involvement in these elections led by the United
States via the Quartet, sees these elections as one way to get rid of
Arafat. They are demanding that the law or constitution be changed
before the elections are held in order to guarantee Arafat's
transformation into a mere symbolic figure, or he is pushed out of the
Authority altogether.

The international community sees the proposed elections as a mechanism
for bridging the time period set in US President Bush's speech for
creating a Palestinian state by 2005. In this context, the European
initiative presented by Denmark ties the current situation to the coming
three years, after which time a Palestinian state can be created.

The Palestinian view of the elections, both popular and official, would
be accepting of "reform" if it were not for Israeli and American
interventions. These interventions drive the Palestinian public to
support the Palestinian president, Yasser Arafat. It sees these
elections as an opportunity to renew the legitimacy of Arafat and
reelect him.

Moreover, the holding of elections in accordance with the old rules
requires an Israeli withdrawal from all the areas it has occupied, which
will help the Palestinians to make use of international monitors.
Palestinians see, in the idea of offering all Palestinians the right to
elections, a means of facilitating their rights to the ground on which
they stand and strengthening the concepts of independence and
self-determination.

