The first (and thus far only) Palestinian Authority elections were held
in January 1996. During the countdown to those elections, in late 1995,
I was involved in convening and coordinating a series of meetings
between political and intellectual leaders of the settler community in
the West Bank, and senior Palestinian officials and intellectuals from
the nascent Palestinian Authority. This unique episode in informal
Israeli-Palestinian dialogue is chronicled in a book I published in
Hebrew several months ago, And the Wolf Shall Dwell with the Wolf: the
Settlers and the Palestinians. Several of the Palestinian participants
in those meetings, such as Hassan Asfour and Sufian Abu Zaida, were
actually campaigning for election to the Palestinian Assembly.

At one of these unusual meetings, Asfour and Gazan security chief
Muhammad Dahlan turned to Yisrael Harel, then Chairman of the Council of
Settlers, and Uri Elizur, then editor of Nekuda, the settlers' monthly
publication, and made a request. Extremist settlers were threatening to
disrupt the Palestinian elections. Would Harel and Elizur intervene,
restrain their constituents from interfering with the approaching
election campaign, and induce them to prevent violence and to maintain a
low profile on election day, January 20? "You have an interest in
supporting our free and democratic elections," Asfour explained.

In the ensuing days Harel and Elizur spoke with additional settler
leaders regarding their obligation to honor the Palestinians' democratic
process and not interfere with their elections. Indeed, the PA elections
were held on January 20 with minimal settler interference, and were
certified by international observers as having been by and large fair
and democratic. The elections confirmed Yasir Arafat as the undisputed
leader of the Palestinians.

The second PA elections are currently scheduled--by a seemingly
powerless veteran Palestinian leadership--for January 15, 2002. A lot
has happened in the intervening six years. Israel and the Palestinians
have been at war for two of them. The very notion of settlers
facilitating a Palestinian election now sounds like a bad joke. Arafat
has single-handedly destroyed his own credibility among Israelis, among
many Arabs, including Palestinians, and with the rest of the world. The
PA is broadly considered a terrorist entity, rife with corruption.
Israel--hurting and angry from suicide bombings, feeling betrayed by
Arafat and his cronies--has reoccupied most of areas A and B, imposing
curfews and other sharp restrictions on movement, and the world has
acquiesced. Daily life for most Palestinians has become hell. Some
members of the Israeli security and political elite now openly advocate
yet more extreme measures--everything from "transfer" to the virtual
"denazification" of the Palestinian leadership structure.

It is striking to note that six short years ago Israelis, even extremist
Israelis like the settlers, along with the US administration and many
others on the international scene, openly supported or acquiesced in the
election of Yasir Arafat. Today, in contrast, many of these same parties
take an essentially cynical and manipulative attitude: if Palestinian
elections can be guaranteed to produce a squeaky clean replacement for
Arafat in an atmosphere devoid of violence, fine; if not, then best
postpone them, or ensure that they are never held. In any case, ongoing
Palestinian violence means continued Israeli occupation, which in turn
means that it is impossible for Palestinians to hold elections. And even
if Israel withdraws in time, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's refusal to
allow East Jerusalem Palestinians to participate in such elections (as
they did in 1996) would probably constitute sufficient cause for Arafat
not to hold them.

These circumstances strengthen the assessment, attributed to Foreign
Minister Shimon Peres, that when it comes to Israel's elections, Arafat
is really Sharon's best ally. Not only did Arafat's support for
Palestinian violence get Sharon elected in the first place. As long as
Arafat is in power and there is no genuine reform of Palestinian ruling
institutions, there will be little pressure on Sharon--from the Bush
administration and the Israeli public--to reconstitute a genuine peace
process. And as long as there is no prospect of a peace process, Israeli
left wing and centrist voters who elected Sharon in early 2001 are less
likely to revert to a left wing candidate in Israel's elections of 2003,
and Israeli right-wingers are less likely to abandon Sharon in favor of
Netanyahu.

The notion of symbiosis between Palestinian and Israeli political
behavior is nothing new. Through his actions and inactions, Arafat has
been electing and dethroning Israeli prime ministers for about a decade.
That this is still the case is perhaps the best proof of all that the
man is not "irrelevant."

