Initially, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon declared repeatedly that
the roadmap                                                  plan went
against all Israeli security and national interests, and placed many
conditions before he would consider accepting it. Only weeks later did
Sharon acquiesce--under great pressure from the United States and
because Israel was the only party who had yet to agree to the document.
All the eyes of the world were watching Sharon, and in response he had
to move forward to relieve that pressure.

In truth, the roadmap is not so bad for Israel. It allows for a very
long period of discussion and does not talk about the serious issues
before minor steps. All of the really important questions are postponed
until an indefinite date. While Sharon could not escape acceptance of
the roadmap, he is counting on escaping its implementation, and the
roadmap's many weaknesses make it an easy wager that Sharon will succeed.

For its part, the Palestinian Authority has no other options. It has
accepted all proposed solutions: from Oslo to the Hebron accords, Wye
River, Mitchell and the Tenet work plan. The Palestinian Authority is
traveling down a single track. It argues that Palestinians will accept
the roadmap because they will get something from Israel in return: push
the Israeli military back to the pre-intifada borders of September 28,
2000 or stop the growth of settlements, for example. The Palestinian
Authority wants to put the train back on the negotiations track because
it cannot go on fighting Israeli forces and is receiving little support
from Arab countries. The leadership feels itself alone against the
immense power and aggression of the Israeli occupation. In particular,
Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas has always believed that Palestinians
cannot gain by armed struggle against Israel and therefore, that we must
return to the peace process at any price.

But we have tested Israel many times. For ten years, we made agreement
after agreement, without implementation. This is the crux of the
Palestinian problem--the Palestinian Authority is always accepting
intervention from the United States, the European community, or even the
Israeli side, and then afterwards can do little but complain that Israel
is not committed and settlements are increasing and Israel is
confiscating more land. This language of defeat must stop. We cannot
waste more time because throughout, Palestinians are suffering. Their
problems are not waiting, as we wait for the agreement of the Israeli side.

The mistake of the Palestine Liberation Organization from the beginning
was that it agreed to comprehensive agreement and a partition of the
solution. In other words, all problems should be settled, and afterwards
the two sides would discuss the implementation stage by stage. Only
after accepting the roadmap will we talk about solving Jerusalem, the
refugees, the borders--all of the final issues. In order to resolve
these complicated problems, we will need twenty or thirty years. It is a
train on a circular track and eventually we will return to the very
first station.

Currently, the Palestinian Authority and Hamas and Islamic Jihad are in
dialogue over the implementation of the roadmap. This is something quite
normal because Hamas and the Authority are facing the same enemy: both
are looking to end the Israeli occupation. While there are differences
over the tactics and means, it is very important that the language used
to describe these differences is one of "dialogue". Repeatedly, Hamas
says that it will not use armed struggle against the Authority, and
Abbas has also indicated that he will not wield violence against the
Palestinian factions.

We are, as one Palestinian people, facing great troubles: Israeli
occupation, aggression, home demolitions and assassination. We will not
add more weight to our shoulders in the form of clashes between Hamas
and the Palestinian Authority. These two parties have become wise in
their disagreements and prefer to sit down and talk. Hamas has turned
increasingly pragmatic and wants to give Abbas a chance, but it also has
its conditions, which mean that Israel must stop at least some of its
illegal and unacceptable aggression. If Israel does not concede,
Hamas--or any other Palestinian faction, for that matter--will not
remain silent.

While the coming days may see some easing of tensions, it is very
difficult to imagine that the roadmap will endure. There are hundreds of
obstacles before the parties, and the roadmap offers no path for
navigating the most sensitive and important issues. We have seen George
Mitchell, Anthoni Zinni, George Tenet, Colin Powell, and now George Bush
come to the region, but none of their approaches worked. Prime Minister
Abbas will be unable to continue along the roadmap if there is no
pressure on Israel to evacuate settlements here in Gaza, for example, or
declare the boundaries of a Palestinian state. (A Palestinian state
surrounded by Israeli forces or full of settlements dividing Palestinian
towns is not an acceptable state.) In this, Prime Minister Abbas is
making the same mistake the PLO made in 1993 by agreeing to implement
the small things now, and ignoring the big problems until later. Israel
will force even the smallest negotiations to take much time, and then
there will be something--killing, demolishing,
assassinations--Palestinians will react and we will be back at that very
first station: how to bring about a real and immediate end to the
Israeli occupation.

