One of the distinguishing characteristics of the current crisis in
Israeli-Palestinian relations is the virtual collapse, with a few
prominent exceptions, of the capacity of the two sides to communicate
productively with one another. Israelis and Palestinians who dialogued
successfully prior to October 2000 now appear to have lost their common
vocabulary, their shared lexicon of agreed terms.

In reality, they may never have had a common vocabulary. Rather, a
temporarily successful peace process, generated by a number of broad
geostrategic conditions, and the optimism it produced, merely concealed
the two parties' lack of a common vocabulary of dialogue for a few
years. Even the Oslo Declaration of Principles of 1993, by postponing
final status issues, simply papered over the communications gap. When
the peace process collapsed and the current Intifada erupted some two
years ago that gap was revealed, tragically. Since then it has grown to
awesome proportions.

Undoubtedly, both Israelis and Palestinians of good will really wish to
improve communications. This article, written in that spirit, looks at
the issue from the Israeli standpoint, recognizing that Palestinians
have their own list of complaints about Israeli input to the
communications gap.

First, historical foundations: some of the difficulties go back to
Arab/Palestinian misinterpretation and abuse of international norms and
resolutions beginning many years ago. Dwelling upon them might seem like
pointless quibbling if it were not the Palestinians who constantly
insist on the principle of "international legitimacy." Here are some of
the more obvious examples:

    * UN General Assembly Resolution 181 of 1947, which the Palestine
      Liberation Organization recognized in 1988, creates "independent
      Arab and Jewish states" in mandatory Palestine. This is the most
      fundamental "international legitimacy" of all. Yet most
      Palestinians, indeed most Arabs, increasingly including Israeli
      Palestinians, acknowledge 181 while implicitly or explicitly
      rejecting the notion that Israel is a legitimate Jewish state and
      that there is a Jewish people.
    * UN General Assembly Resolution 194 of 1948, which the Arabs voted
      against, does not establish a "right of return" of 1948 refugees.
      Yet it is cited by Palestinians as the source of that right, which
      in turn implies the delegitimizing of Israel as a Jewish state.
    * UN Security Council Resolution 242 of 1967 mandates an Israeli
      withdrawal from "territories" (in the binding English version) and
      not "the territories." Yet Palestinians cite 242 as justification
      for demanding Israel's withdrawal to the 1967 lines, and insist on
      adding the definite article.
    * Those 1967 lines separating Israel from the West Bank and Gaza are
      armistice lines, not international borders. They are substantively
      different from Israel's international borders with Egypt, Syria,
      Lebanon and Jordan. This too is relevant for the nature of Israeli
withdrawal.

It is of course legitimate for the Palestinians to demand withdrawal to
the 1967 borders--but not under false pretenses.

To these basic Palestinian misunderstandings that preceded the Intifada
must now be added a newer list of incorrect generalizations and
misunderstood terms that crop up repeatedly in Palestinian discourse,
and render communications with Israelis of good will all the more
difficult. For example:

    * The advocacy of "transfer" (ethnic cleansing of Palestinians) by
      certain circles in Israel is bad. But it does not help when
      Palestinians label as "transfer" proposals of a very different and
      entirely legitimate nature, sanctioned by centuries of
      international conflict resolution, such as territorial swaps
      involving not only Israeli settlers but Israeli Palestinians.
    * Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's strategic intent to retain Israeli
      military control over the West Bank and Gaza may be supportive of,
      and allied with, the ideological Greater Land of Israel movement,
      but the two should not be confused. If Palestinians wish to oppose
      Sharon's territorial policies effectively, they should at least
      understand their strategic military, rather than ideological,
      underpinnings.
    * Because many Palestinians are effectively surrounded, and
      fragmented, by Israeli fences and roadblocks, they are inclined to
      condemn the unilateral redeployment movement--which calls for
      removal of settlements and the construction of a fence more or
      less along the Green Line--as "more of the same" In fact, this
      version of "separation" would give Palestinians control over large
      additional swaths of territory in return for no new commitments
      and without prejudicing a future peace process.
    * A majority of Israelis, this writer included, oppose many of the
      settlements and call for their removal, but this does not mean
      that Israelis sanction attacks against settlers. When Palestinian
      Authority Interior Minister Hani al-Hassan states (Haaretz, 29
      October 2002) that "the settlers cannot be considered civilians"
      he is ideologically not far from the spokesmen of the Islamist
      organizations who argue that Israel is a militarized society in
      which all Jews, including women and children, are fair game. At
      least the Islamists are not trying to persuade Israelis of the
      justice of their cause; but al-Hassan, who sends me a Rosh HaShana
      card every year, presumably is. Hence he, and those who think like
      him, must be put on notice that their concept of who is and is not
      an Israeli civilian is unacceptable to all Israelis.

