In the summer of 2000, barely a month before the Camp David summit, a
group of Israelis and Palestinians convened in Europe to discuss the
issues of the Holy Sites in Jerusalem. A number of religious leaders
also took part. At one point in the discussion, an Islamic cleric let
loose with a verbal volley, rife with anti-Semitic imagery, the gist of
which was: "You Jews should look for your Temple elsewhere. You have no
ties to Harem a-Sharif."

An embarrassed hush fell over the deliberations. When we broke, one of
the senior Palestinians came over and said apologetically: "Do you see
the kind of prejudices Chairman Arafat has to deal with in his
constituency?"

Two weeks after the Camp David summit, I received a phone call from a
senior American negotiator. "I just came from Arafat," he said. "He
really doesn't think the Temple is there. How do we explain it too him?"
It turned out that the barriers to a resolution of the issue of the
Temple Mount/Harem a-Sharif were not only in "the constituencies" but in
the hearts and minds of the senior decisionmakers. It also became
apparent that the negotiators were singularly unprepared to deal with
the volatile and complex issues at hand.

Any attempt to move forward towards a political resolution of the issue
of the Mount/Harem requires an analysis of the underlying factors that
led to failure in the political talks. I wish to offer a number of
tentative observations in this regard:

* The Mount/Harem is no mere "real estate": the site and the symbolism
it evokes are the primordial materials of which national consciousness
is made. Two mutually incompatible national narratives compete in the
same limited sacred space, in the place most important to each party.

* In the past, those engaged in the preparatory negotiations concerning
the Mount/Harem, were least prone to hear the symbolic "siren call" of
the Mount/Harem--and on both sides, those most attuned to its powerful
imagery were least prone to dialogue.

* In the years prior to Camp David, Jewish claims to the Mount were
subsumed in the monolithic claims enunciated by Israel in regard to "a
united Jerusalem," further contributing to the Palestinian failure to
fathom the depth and intensity of the Jewish sentiments.

* The "creative ideas" for the Mount/Harem often proved to be "gimmicks"
that did not disclose a grasp of how the symbolic imagery resonates in
each constituency. The Clinton proposals, which envisage a "vertical"
differentiation of sovereignty on the Mount/Harem, proved
counterproductive, exacerbating rather than allaying irrational fears.
An extensive Palestinian popular literature exists, promulgating the
baseless fear that the Zionists would emerge from underground shafts and
engulf the Mosques. The Clinton proposals inadvertently fell on these
irrational fears. Prime Minister Barak's position that he would not
"turn over" sovereignty on the Mount to Palestinians (implying he could
turn it over to a third party, who in turn would deliver sovereignty to
the Palestinians, as though it were an "assist" in basketball) had
little potential popular credibility.

* Israeli public opinion perceives the denial of legitimate Jewish
claims to the Mount as a litmus test, indicating that the Palestinians
have not acquiesced to the legitimacy of Israeli presence anywhere in
the Land of Israel.

* The Mount/Harem is the quintessential arena in which the extreme
elements on both sides attempt to undermine a comprehensive political
agreement between the parties. A sustained assault, rhetorical and
otherwise, by these extremes, is a given, and requires clear and
aggressive crisis-management mechanisms in any future political settlement.

* There are established Jewish and Islamic religious traditions that are
conducive to compromise. Strong religious/cultural Jewish schools of
thought place little stock in physical control of the Mount--provided
that the legitimacy of the Jewish narrative and claim is recognized, and
that the sanctity of Jewish artifacts is protected from desecration.
There is a respected Islamic tradition which recognizes the legitimacy
of historic Jewish ties to the Harem, in ways that do not derogate from
the depth of the claims of Islam.

* It is regrettable that the arrangements on the Mount/Harem have
"congealed" around the issue of sovereignty, a term singularly
inappropriate to resolving the "clash of narratives." However, after the
Clinton parameters, it is highly unlikely that a settlement of the
Mount/Harem will take place without some form of Palestinian sovereignty
over the Mount/Harem. The stronger the affirmations of the legitimacy of
Jewish ties to the Mount, and the mechanisms for protection of Jewish
interests--the stronger the Israeli public willingness will be to cede
sovereignty on the Mount to the Palestinians.

* The issues involved cannot be solved by either gimmick or obfuscation.
At the end of the day, a political settlement will require the courage
of two national political leaders attuned to their own national and
religious traditions. They need to hammer out of these malleable
materials arrangements that will allow each party to maintain its ties
to a site sacred to both, in a manner not threatening to the beliefs and
interests of the other. The materials exist--and await the political
courage necessary to put them in place.

