The current conflict between the Palestinian people who live under
occupation and the occupying state of Israel is one that cannot be ended
with a win-lose solution. As such, many in both Palestinian and Israeli
society are convinced that this conflict cannot be brought to a close
through sheer force. Unfortunately, there is a trend in Israel that has
grown strong over the last two years, which behaves and builds its
policy on the belief that it is possible to end the conflict through
military force and then follow that victory with a solution meeting this
camp's aspirations to maintain the occupation on the one hand, and
provide security for Israel on the other. In theory, therefore, the way
out of this vicious cycle is clear, despite that we are missing the
major component of an Israeli party willing and capable of getting out
of this circle.

The belief that a war against Iraq will be a mechanical kind of
operation, starting and stopping within a currently predictable timeline
is not a clear-headed estimation. It is possible that the United States
may become preoccupied for a very long time with the consequences of the
war against Iraq, and will therefore have no time to allocate to the
Arab-Israeli conflict directly after the war. This means that the
conflict may escalate, taking the form of increasingly tragic and bloody
chapters.

On the other hand, if we assume that the international community, led by
the US, is actually willing to provide the suitable atmosphere for a
comprehensive solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, then I
believe that solution must be a complete package deal. This does not
contradict the need for gradual implementation, which will ultimately
lead to ending the occupation and enabling the Palestinian people to
practice self-determination and establish their state.

This goal should be understood from the beginning. The two peoples,
Palestinians and Israelis, are living in a state of acute frustration
regarding the possibility of finding a solution. Therefore any vision or
idea that does not give the two peoples a feeling of hope that it is
possible to achieve peace and security will not find the required
sympathy and support among the respective publics. Probably the most
important step in the first stage is to stop the deterioration in the
relationship through a plan that has a time frame of no more than three
months, during which both parties will implement their commitments fully
as follows:

* Both the Israeli and the Palestinian parties will cease all military
operations of any kind, and in any place, for two weeks.

* Israel will withdraw from the Palestinian cities in three weeks and
Palestinian Authority apparatuses will take over full responsibility for
security in these regions.

* Israel will halt its implementation of assassinations and pursuit of
wanted members of the military wings of Palestinian factions. A special
annex can be made of their names, as was done in 1994 with the names of
wanted Palestinians from the first Intifada in order to give these
elements a sense of having a national and personal stake in implementing
a state of calm.

* Palestinian security and civil institutions should be given the
opportunity to carry out their duties and achieve steps that will
strengthen the Authority's presence and implement the agreed-on reforms
(or those intended to reform Palestinian institutions, at the forefront
of which is conducting presidential, legislative and municipal elections).

* Israel will end all its measures, including imposition of the siege
and closure, and allow Palestinian citizens the freedom of movement to
go about their normal lives. Israel will stop confiscating land, and the
construction of what it calls "the defensive wall." Israel will release
all Palestinian funds.

With the implementation of the above steps, the situation will revert to
that existing prior to September 28, 2000, which will mark completion of
the first stage. Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
will then entrust two documents to the Quartet, in which the PLO will
pledge to reach a final and comprehensive solution in a period not
exceeding one year on the basis of United Nations Security Council
resolutions 242, 338, and United Nations General Assembly Resolution 194
pertaining to the refugee problem. Israel will pledge to reciprocate,
and will also cease all settlement activities and the confiscation of
land. The state of complete calm will continue during this period. Then
intensive negotiations will take place under the sponsorship of the
Quartet, to reach a final resolution that will lead to the following:

* Ending the occupation through a full Israeli withdrawal from all
settlement and military manifestations in the territories occupied in
1967, and the establishment of an independent Palestinian state with
East Jerusalem as its capital.

* Realizing security for both the Palestinian and Israeli peoples.

* Solving the issue of the Palestinian refugees, justly and in
accordance with the international law resolutions.

During the negotiations, Israel will take the initiative to gradually
release the prisoners. The administrative detainees, the young and the
sick will be released first within the framework of an ongoing process.
The issue of prisoners should then be decided through the framework of a
final agreement that will lead to the release of all prisoners.

I understand fully that the ideas suggested here do not match the
current regional and international atmosphere. These concepts also
flagrantly contradict the ideology governing the behavior of the extreme
right wing in power in Israel today. However, I am confident that any
other model, one dictated by Israel's weight in the balance of power,
will not lead to a comprehensive solution for the conflict. There is a
possibility that contingency plans based on the gloomy atmosphere might
be implemented, but they will not lead to a real return to the
negotiations table, nor achieve freedom and security for Palestinians
and security and peace for the Israelis.

