The year 2005 is not likely to see any dramatic change in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict unless the major players are prepared to
allow it to happen.

The main reason this year is set to be a continuation of the last rather
than a breakthrough is that the prime mover in the conflict--the Israeli
government--appears to be neither changing it positions nor its
behavior. As such, three major obstacles to any positive developments
will carry over: the Israeli government will continue to avoid
negotiations; the use of force against the Palestinian population will
go on; and so will settlement expansions and the various means of
collective punishments meted out against the Palestinians with all that
that entails in terms of negative economic consequences and resentment.

Meanwhile, Israel continues to successfully deceive the third parties to
the conflict, whether the US or others, with its talk of an illusory
withdrawal from certain parts of occupied Palestinian territory and the
evacuation of certain settlements. This talk is no more than a political
tactic to serve the internal and external purposes of the current
Israeli government.

It thus follows that there will be a continuation of the disengagement
of the third parties. The US is showing no sign of stepping up its own
efforts to enforce the first phase of the roadmap, nor is Washington
allowing the quartet countries to do so. The almost identical
ideological make-up of the US administration and the Israeli government
puts them on the same page in this regard, while the American engagement
in Iraq is keeping the US busy.

Changes on the Palestinian political scene also will not have a dramatic
effect on the conflict and Palestinian-Israeli relations. The
Palestinian positions and practices are not the major reasons for the
current stagnation and confrontations. In any case, the current
leadership transition, significant developments in the democratization
process, the accelerated reform process as well as the absence of the
late President Yasser Arafat, who was blamed by Israel for the
confrontations over the past four years, will not affect the situation
on the ground and relations between the two sides as long as they are
not met by positive Israeli countermeasures. Israel must show a
willingness to fulfill its obligations under the first phase of the
roadmap, including stopping the expansion of settlements, violence
against Palestinian civilians, and military incursions inside
Palestinian Authority areas, including checkpoints and closures.

If such measures are not forthcoming it is possible that the second half
of this year might witness some internal Palestinian difficulties. If
the current pro-peace and democratic trend within Palestinian political
life and the obvious de-radicalization of the general population do not
bring Palestinians nearer the fulfillment of their legitimate rights and
aspirations, it will play into the hands of the opposition and
extremists who will again gain the upper hand by arguing that the
peaceful approach is not working.

If the international community, and especially the US, is prepared to
engage actively with the peace camp in Israel and the Palestinian
government by pushing to resume negotiations and enforcing adherence to
obligations obtaining under the roadmap, 2005 has the potential to bring
positive change. After four years of confrontations, neither side has
achieved anything. But the Israeli government will not change its
policies without pressure from the US. And if the Israeli government
does not change direction, there will be no change on the ground and
another opportunity will go beckoning.

