During the Oslo process the Palestinians missed an opportunity to alter
the pattern of reciprocal relations when they fundamentally violated the
agreements they had signed with Israel, particularly by invoking force
against Israelis. The basic assumptions for an improvement of relations
between the sides are:

1. A political process must be initiated in stages, since the attempt to
reach a comprehensive agreement has failed and cannot be revived,
certainly not on the basis of the Clinton principles. The Israeli public
is today not prepared to take the risks and to make the concessions that
it might have made in the summer of 2000. Accordingly, the right way is
a "roadmap" that comprises an incremental approach, proceeding step by
step over considerable time along a predetermined route.

2. One precondition for any progress is the removal or neutralization of
Yasir Arafat. His leadership has brought disaster to his people and
generated total mistrust among Israelis, Americans and other
international actors. His ongoing presence will impede the emergence of
an alternative Palestinian leadership--a complex and prolonged process.

3. The primary test of the new leadership will be the courage to create
a monopoly on the use of force within the Palestinian Authority (PA),
even at the cost of civil war. The primary lesson of the failure of the
Oslo process is that the PA is incapable of constituting a partner in a
peace process unless it centralizes control over all armed forces.

4. An additional lesson of the Oslo process is the necessity of
verifying the fulfillment of all obligations prior to advancing to the
next phase of the roadmap.

5. The roadmap timetable will be determined primarily by the capacity of
the Palestinians to act efficiently against armed groups that do not
accept the decisions of the leadership.

6. On the Israeli side there must be a clear and demonstrated readiness
for a territorial compromise that includes the dismantling of a number
of settlements. Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, many elements within the
Likud, and the new government clearly fulfill this condition.

The "roadmap" has two operative objectives. The first is a gradual
return to the situation that prevailed prior to the outburst of a wave
of terrorism in September 2000, i.e., to Palestinian rule over the
cities. The second is the signing of a long-term (15-20 years) interim
agreement, with negotiations over remaining areas of dispute commencing
toward its completion.

Achieving the first objective depends on adopting the model prevailing
in Jericho. That town is under Palestinian rule because it does not
constitute a base or infrastructure for terrorist activity against
Israeli targets. There have also been attempts to transfer
responsibility over Bethlehem and Hebron to the Palestinian Authority,
but the Palestinians were not able to maintain the peace. The Jericho
precedent demonstrates that the Palestinians have the capacity to
prevent terrorism. The transfer of additional territory is dependent on
similar results. In parallel, Israel must provide access to its job
market and take additional economic steps to improve the Palestinians'
situation, particularly in areas returned to Palestinian rule. Effective
control by the PA for several months over territory restored to its
security and civil control is a precondition for the transfer of
additional territory. It may be possible to complete this phase within
two years from start to finish.

One year after the PA has centralized control over its security
apparatus and proven its effectiveness in preventing terrorism--in
effect, fundamentally altered its nature--it will be possible to enter
negotiations regarding an interim agreement. The objective of the
interim agreement is to create a new reality, whereby friction between
the Palestinian and Israeli populations is minimized, while Israel
retains territorial assets that can be delivered to the Palestinians
under final status. Shortly after signing the interim agreement Israel
will transfer additional territory to the PA and remove several isolated
settlements.

During the period of the interim agreement the PA can be granted symbols
of sovereignty such as a national currency and/or full membership in
international organizations. In practice its sovereignty will be limited
by Israeli control over border crossings and strict arms control
measures. There may be room to involve Jordan in arrangements in the
West Bank and Egypt in Gaza. In the course of the interim agreement the
PA must revise its textbooks and begin teaching subjects like democracy
and respect for the historic and religious rights of the Jews in the
Land of Israel.

The geographic profile of the proposed final status corresponds with the
Alon Plan, whereby Israel retains the Jordan Valley, where there is no
Arab population, along with the approach to it from greater Jerusalem
via Maaleh Adummim. Territorial concessions under the interim agreement
are of course derived from the Alon Plan map.

