Ariel Sharon's victory in the Knesset elections at the head of the Likud
list gives him something that belies the familiar cliche: a second
chance to leave a first impression. Until now he headed a government
based on a Knesset that was elected along with Ehud Barak. Now he's
finally alone at the top, his responsibility as unequivocal as the test
he faces.

Within the endless tension between reality and aspiration, Sharon
emerges at the pragmatic, prudent pole. He may not have abandoned the
caprice of holding onto most of the settlements and the territory in the
West Bank, but his ardor runs headlong into cooler calculations
regarding what President George W. Bush will permit him to do. This is
not necessarily "statesmanship"--it's sufficient to consider it
survivorship. Sharon cannot allow himself to get on a collision track
with Bush that would put an end to his government and his own political
career. Early elections yet again, and this time against a backdrop
antithetical to that of the January 2003 elections, meaning in an
atmosphere of hostility rather than love between Bush and Sharon, will
send Sharon into retirement at Sycamore Ranch. The Israeli voter,
whatever his considered judgment regarding the issue of "territories for
peace," is not inclined to applaud his/her leaders when they lose favor
with the White House.

This was plainly evident over the past three months, following the
resignation of Binyamin Ben Eliezer and the other Labor ministers.
Sharon preferred to hold early elections rather than set up a narrow
based government dependent on Avigdor Lieberman. True, he was also
influenced by calculations regarding the internal contest with
Netanyahu, Lieberman's ally (it's sufficient to recall Sharon's panicky
reaction on the day of the Likud primary, following the attacks in
Mombasa and Bet Shean, to appreciate just how central those calculations
were in his thinking). Nevertheless he was never tempted to abandon his
readiness to establish a Palestinian state--not one that's fully
sovereign, not a state within borders acceptable to the Palestinians and
their supporters, yet still breaking the taboo and blatantly defying
Netanyahu, Lieberman and that portion of the Israeli public (apparently
one quarter or less, but a much stronger proportion within the Likud)
that is closer than Sharon to the extreme right.

Sharon has turned the Bush vision, as expressed in the president's June
24, 2002 speech, into one of his holy writs. This is the written law.
Its exegesis, the oral law (particularly the State Department's "road
map"), is subject to discussion and improvement. The practical
significance of the Bush vision is simple: the Palestinian state will be
established by the year 2005, but first comes 2004 (the year of Bush's
reelection, along with congressional elections where Bush hopes to
preserve the Republicans' fragile majority) and the disappearance, in
real or at least political terms, of two negative regional
forces--Saddam Hussein and Yasir Arafat.

Without them there will emerge a new regional order. Jordan will be
freed of Iraqi pressure on the east and Palestinian pressure on the
west; and a Palestine without Arafat and with a new leadership (whose
central figures were not disqualified by Sharon even five years ago,
during the Netanyahu government) that recognizes the failure of
terrorism, will constitute an acceptable formula. Arafat no, Palestine yes.

This is more or less what the Planning Branch in Israel Defense Forces
General Staff Headquarters proposed to Sharon in late July 2002: hang
tough, wait until Arafat departs the scene, until Saddam is gone and
until a separation fence is built between the West Bank and Israel
proper. This can be seen as an extension of Sharon's agreement to the
Mitchell Commission Report, to his statement on the night of the
Dolphinarium bombing that "restraint is strength," to the positions he
took regarding the mediation missions of George Tenet and Anthony Zinni.
In all these instances Sharon behaved as if compelled by his
governmental partnership with Labor. Yet even after its dissolution he
did not abandon this line--not even to fulfill his declared desire to
expel Arafat.

Sharon's efforts to bring Labor back into his government, a centrist
government without right or left wings, reflect his intention to adhere
to a policy that will consummate the Bush vision. And the extent of
Bush's tenacity in translating his vision into reality will determine
just how far Sharon goes.

