A new approach to the "roadmap" idea must derive from a sober
reassessment of the failings of the peace process thus far:

* UN Security Council Resolution 242, upon which the Oslo Declaration of
Principles based final status negotiations, does not deal with specific
Israeli-Palestinian issues like the refugees and Jerusalem, and is
ambiguous about the territorial issues. It is therefore not a sufficient
foundation for the process.

* The concept of a phased solution has failed. Phasing provided too many
opportunities for the extremists on both sides to intervene. Certainly
the final objective of the process must be defined in advance in order
to provide focus and an incentive to proceed.

* The premise that close economic cooperation generates mutual trust and
Palestinian prosperity also failed. Indeed, it proved totally
counterproductive for security.

* The parties need outside help, including compulsory arbitration, but
not an imposed settlement.

* Having repeatedly postponed dealing with the most acute
problems--Palestinian violence and Israeli settlements--the parties have
now reached a point where they must deal with them forthwith. These two
afflictions threaten to erode and even destroy the very souls of their
respective societies from within.

* Mutual trust has broken down so badly that negotiations should not
take place at the beginning of the roadmap process. Productive talks
must await a new process of confidence-building.

* The current roadmap ignores virtually all these realities and is
largely inoperable.

We must begin with two separate roadmaps, based on parallel unilateral
steps taken by both sides, only after which the roadmaps merge.

The damage wrought by Israel's settlement policies, coupled with the
growing Palestinian demographic advantage, mandate a decision to
undertake unilateral redeployment and dismantling of settlements if
Israel wants to "save its soul" as a Jewish and democratic state. Israel
must choose demography over geography. The advantages of withdrawing
without a quid pro quo from the Gaza Strip with its 17 settlements and
from the mountain heartland of the West Bank (some 30-40 settlements)
far outweigh the disadvantages. Israel would continue to hold the Jordan
Valley, greater Jerusalem and the settlement blocs near the green line
pending final status negotiations, and would complete construction of
the green line fence with international assistance.

In parallel the Palestinians must declare and implement a unilateral
ceasefire. Here too, the advantages for Palestine of ending the violence
without a quid pro quo far outweigh the drawbacks. Israel's unilateral
withdrawal from Palestinian population concentrations should facilitate
this move. Palestinian security authorities will have to exercise
special vigilance to ensure that Palestinian militants don't
misinterpret Israel's withdrawal as a sign of weakness--otherwise the
entire process will fail.

Two developments could follow. One is the stabilization of the situation
and a radical reduction in violence. This should enable an early
resumption, on an emergency basis, of minimal economic relations,
including movement of Palestinian day laborers into and out of Israel.

A second possible move is the introduction of an American-led
international trusteeship into the West Bank and Gaza, to oversee a
process of infrastructure and economic recovery and sponsor steps toward
state-building. One of the tasks of the trusteeship should be to develop
a Palestinian economic base less dependent on the Israeli currency and
customs infrastructure and more closely integrated into the regional
Arab economy. This too will be rendered much easier by the separation of
forces and removal of settlers instituted unilaterally by Israel. In
effect, following Israeli withdrawal the Palestinian leadership could
declare a state and introduce the trusteeship force unilaterally.

Once the situation is stabilized through this series of largely
unilateral measures, the roadmaps will coalesce. Final status
negotiations will commence, based on 242, the Saudi/Arab League Plan and
the Clinton Principles. From the outset Israel would accept the 1967
green line boundary, with balanced territorial swaps, as the point of
departure for a territorial settlement; the Palestine Liberation
Organization would acknowledge that there will be no right of return to
Israel proper and that Israel has a legitimate historical claim to a
role, however symbolic, on the Temple Mount/Harem a-Sharif (under
Palestinian control).

Sadly, even the preliminary, unilateral acts called for by this plan do
not seem likely as long as none of the three principal
leaders--Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon and United States President George W. Bush--fails to develop a
realistic strategy for peace.

