Despite the heightened attention Syria has been receiving in recent
months due to accusations that it is dabbling in the battlefield of
Iraq, and more recently after Israel's October air bombing just near
Damascus, in fact, Syria remains politically insignificant when it comes
to both the Iraq war and the Arab-Israel conflict.

In fact, since Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon in 2000, Syria's role
has diminished much to that of bystander. Even though Israel continues
to occupy Syrian land in the Golan Heights, that occupation takes a very
different form than Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip,
and has never been incendiary enough to cause serious tension. The most
recent violent events on that front were during the 1973 war, 30 years ago.

That does not mean that the outstanding dispute was relegated entirely
to the back burner, but the Syrian track really only became relevant in
history when Israel decided it was relevant. For example, former Israeli
Prime Minister Ehud Barak revived negotiations when he chose, against
American advice, to give priority to the Syrian track over its
Palestinian counterpart in hopes of a breakthrough. Of course, in
keeping with its long-standing and correct position, Syria insisted on a
complete Israeli withdrawal in accordance with the letter of the
relevant Security Council resolutions.

Previously, Syria had an important role to play in balancing out the
Israeli occupation and using the Lebanese resistance, but even then
Syria was only important behind the scenes. Syria's actions were always
indirect, its interventions third party and its chain of command far
removed. There was a time when Syria pressured Israel by using or
supporting some Palestinian groups, and pressured the United States and
Israel during Israel's long-term occupation of Lebanon by encouraging
Lebanese political groups and militias. But those days are long-gone and
Syria has become more introspective with changing times. Now, Syria has
little if anything to do with the hottest regional issues, especially
that of the Palestine problem.

More likely the reason that Syria is now making news is that Israel has
returned to the familiar canard that Syria is a threat because it hosts
a number of Palestinian political offices and leaders whose factions are
active against the Israeli occupation. In fact, over and above the
strict and long-standing Syrian prohibitions against using Syrian
borders to launch any kind of attack against Israel, there is little
else Syria can do. It seems more likely that Israel's charges and now
even military attacks are designed to serve internal political aims and
distract the Israeli public from the obvious fact that all of Israel's
military interventions in the occupied territories have failed. Israel
is not secure today nor has it managed to quell Palestinian resistance
to the Israeli occupation despite this government's use of all manner of
atrocities. Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon wants us all to forget
this failure, and Syria is his amnesia of choice.

If there is anything remarkable about the role of Syria in the region,
in fact, it is that the last 20 to 25 years mark a time of dramatic
reversal during which the entire Arab-Israel conflict has gone back to
its original state. Arab involvement in the conflict today is barely
worth mentioning, and largely verbal. Those countries that were involved
at one time have now withdrawn--Egypt since the Camp David treaty and
Syria since the 1973 October War and Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon.
Gradually, the regional conflict has become solely a Palestinian-Israeli
conflict augmented by moral, semi-political and financial Arab support.
As such, Israel's media blitz about the Syrian threat is nothing more
than propaganda whipping up phantom threats and ghost enemies to justify
more military action and hard-line positions.

