Palestinians remain puzzled over the nature of the American peace
mission led by General Anthony Zinni. Is he coming to repeat what
previous American envoys like Central Intelligence Agency Director
George Tenet tried and failed to do, i.e. "ensure quiet" and "enforce
the ceasefire" and "stop the violence"? Or has he come to assist us
Palestinians and Israelis in moving from the current political, security
and economic misery into the better world United States Secretary of
State Colin Powell described in his speech: an end to occupation,
Palestinian statehood and peace and security for all.

What adds to that puzzle is that General Zinni has yet to say little of
substance with the exception of reiterating his intention to help end
the violence, using the Mitchell and Tenet proposals as his guide. So
far, he has listened and given the two sides the opportunity to say what
they feel he needs to know without yet telling them - at least the
Palestinians - what they need to know about his mission and its
limitations.

In the meantime, it seems that just about everyone is trying to tell
Zinni what they think, including the extremists on both sides. Ariel
Sharon and his government, representing the extremist camp in Israeli
society and politics, offered Zinni an example of escalation by renewing
the assassination and random killing of Palestinians, in 48 hours taking
the lives of 15 people, the majority of whom were civilians including
five schoolboys.

The extremists on the Palestinian side, i.e., the Islamic
fundamentalists, responded loudly, also wanting to be heard by Zinni and
sending the message that security for Israel will not happen at the
expense of security for Palestinians.

Now extremists on both sides - Sharon's right-wing government, for
Israelis, and Palestinian groups Hamas and Islamic Jihad, for
Palestinians - have gained the upper hand and are feeding off each
other. Let us, at least for a moment, come back to the center.

Israeli government escalation in the form of killing and a tightening of
the closure will always lead to and legitimize violent actions and
reactions from Palestinian political or religious groups. In return,
these Palestinian attacks on Israelis will also justify further violent
activities from the Israeli government against Palestinians. Moreover,
the two radical camps on both sides gain from this process. Their desire
is to push this conflict towards one of existential importance because
neither wishes to compromise and compromise contradicts both groups'
ideology.

The only way for General Zinni to help us out of this bind is if he
carries out a strong third-party intervention that is based on enforcing
(through peace initiatives, of course) the implementation of the
documents that Palestinians and Israelis have agreed on - at least
officially. These include the recommendations of the commission of
inquiry led by Senator George Mitchell, previous interim agreements and
most importantly, Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338.

Otherwise, the parties will be left alone to wound each other according
to the extreme imbalance of power. Israel will be further encouraged to
proceed with attempts to solve the problem by force. Palestinians, on
the other hand, will be further undermined in their ability to rally
support for a peaceful end to the conflict.

