Q: How do you explain the recent Israeli missile attack
near Damascus?

A: It was a theatrical show and a message sent to Syria. Syria is
probably incapable currently of being dragged into such a battle easily
and therefore, it did not offer a direct response. Syria is not
interested in being dragged kicking, at such unsuitable timing, into a
battle. We consider the Israeli action an isolated event to check the
response and deliver a message--not more than this.

Q: Do you expect more Israeli operations in the future?

A: The Syrians articulated their position clearly. They said that
the offices of the Islamic Jihad are political, not used for military
training. Their position on this is a fair one, and it is impossible
that they would close these offices used for conveying the political
views of their brothers in Palestine.

Syria will not change its position, however it will also not contribute
to escalation in the current circumstances. Syria is undergoing a
process of development and [its leadership] is aware of the conditions
in Iraq, Lebanon and Palestine. They are alert and not interested in
escalation.

Q: Israel is claiming that Syria supports Palestinian
resistance?

A: This is an old Syrian position. Even though it has not
contributed to deterioration along the borders since the Oslo Accords
                                           , it has never stopped
supporting the [Palestinian] resistance movements. However, those
movements do not use Syrian land as the base for their military
operations since Syria has international commitments that it cannot
avoid. All these accusations [by Israel] are political.

There are connections to be made between what is happening in Syria and
Iraq, after demands were made that Syria deter infiltrators [along the
Syria-Iraq border]. But Syria would have to deploy double the number of
troops to respond to this demand. We see what is happening in
Afghanistan where hundreds of thousands of soldiers are deployed. This
is a public relations attack against Syria and the truth is that it is
unjust.

Q: How do you explain Syria's agreement to the Beirut
declaration at the Arab summit where it proposed peace with Israel in
exchange for a full withdrawal from the occupied territories and a
settlement for the refugees?

A: Syria advocates peace and has articulated this on several
occasions. There were negotiations over peace with Israel that were
stopped during [Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak] Rabin's time and the
Syrians still claim that they are ready to resume the talks from the
point at which they were stopped. This indicates a wish for peace--but a
just one. Syria recognized United Nations Resolution 242
                                           , and then attended the
Madrid conference in order to end the Arab-Israel conflict. Syria is
still ready, but Israel has not matured. As long as Syria is distant
from the negotiations process, there will be no peace, or it will be
defective.

Q: Do you think Syria is in a dangerous position after the
Israeli and American threats?

A: I believe that the United States is prepared to repeat its
conduct in Iraq in every Arab country. Some conditions that existed in
Iraq are not present in Syria. Syria has a national front, and the
social and economic situation is stable. They will not find any weapons
of mass destruction in Syria because it is busy with its development
project and is trying to preserve its political position in the face of
all resistance.

There is a broad front supporting Syria and it has backing from all of
the Arab states. There is no justification at all for an attack on
Syria, unlike Iraq. Neither the international context nor the regional
one would allow the outbreak of war and all its destructive
implications. Therefore, I do not think that Syria is in great danger.
It has not committed a provocation to initiate a war.

