In 1994 I was working at the Jaffee Center on a map for a possible
Israeli-Palestinian final status agreement. One of the senior Israeli
politicians I interviewed was Ariel Sharon, then an opposition member of
Knesset. In the course of our talk Sharon pulled out a map and proceeded
to illustrate for me his concept of settlements, territory and the
Palestinians.

"You see this wadi," he explained, pointing to a lonely corner of Judea
in the southern West Bank. "There's a Bedouin tribe here"--Sharon's
knowledge of the territory is unparalleled by anyone, Israeli or
Palestinian. "You see the next wadi over? There's a related Bedouin
tribe there. You see the hill separating the two wadis? That's where I
put a settlement, to keep them apart."

We huddled over the map for another two hours, but this was the essence:
Israel must control the territory for its own security; to do this it
must settle the hilltops and key crossroads, and fragment the
Palestinian presence geographically and demographically. Alternative
reliance on control of the air, demilitarization, an armed presence in
the Jordan Valley, strategic alliance with Jordan, peace with the
Palestinians--all were dismissed by Sharon with chilling worst case
scenarios.

Eventually I published a map of "the Sharon plan." It featured
amoeba-like areas of Palestinian self-rule surrounding the main West
Bank cities in a formation similar to the Oslo interim concept of areas
A and B. Sharon phoned me to protest: why hadn't I published his vision
of the Gaza Strip, too, chopped up into three distinct Palestinian areas
separated by settlements like Netzarim?

The Israeli public that just reelected Sharon and rejected the parties
of the Zionist left is by and large not committed to Sharon's strategic
approach to the West Bank and Gaza, which is destined to embroil Israel
in a South African nightmare and endanger the two characteristics of the
Zionist dream nearly all of us agree on: a democratic, Jewish state. Nor
did the electorate necessarily intend to endorse Sharon's belief that a
docile Palestinian leadership can be found that would accept his vision
of a state somehow embedded in these Bantustan-like amoebas. But the
public very clearly sought to tell the left: stop talking about
negotiating territories-for-peace with Arafat and his gang; concentrate
on our security.

Sharon, for his part, can hardly take credit for delivering on security
(or, for that matter, on peace or prosperity) during the past two years.
Yet he had an easy task in these elections. He simply played back to the
public the recording of Labor Party leader Amram Mitzna undertaking to
renew negotiations unconditionally, where we had left off at Taba two
years earlier. This sufficed to conjure up the image of a confused and
desperate Labor and Meretz-led government delivering concessions on
territorial and right of return issues on the eve of elections and under
the impact of Palestinian violence. To be on the safe side, he also made
sure the public was aware of the gathering war clouds over Iraq, so that
it would prefer his steady hand at the helm (and his friendship with
George W. Bush) to that of an unknown and uncharismatic mayor from Haifa.

The part of Mitzna's platform that Sharon did not dare to attack was
also instructive. Unilateral redeployment and dismantling of settlements
is a popular idea among Israelis. Mitzna confused voters by coupling it
with renewed negotiations. If he hopes to rebuild Labor in the
opposition, this is the position he should stick with.

For Palestinians, the message of these elections is that the Intifada
has destroyed the Israeli public's belief in a reasonable negotiated
settlement in the near term--the kind Palestinians could have had if
they had negotiated in good faith and without violence and acknowledged
that the "right of return" is incompatible with a Jewish state. Because
Palestinians will not replace their leadership and cease the violence,
they appear to most Israelis not to want a fair solution.

Whatever government he puts together, Sharon will now seek to continue
manipulating the "road map" to ensure either that no negotiations take
place at all because of Palestinian violence, or that the only
Palestinian option for the foreseeable future is a pathetic "interim"
rump state, based on territorially separate enclaves.

In the near term, only two developments seem capable of altering this
course of events. One is a war in the Gulf that ends up with the United
States, now the occupying power in Iraq, assessing that it must buy Arab
good will by dealing more energetically with the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The other is a concerted drive by the Israeli left and center
parliamentary opposition to focus solely on the benefits for Israel of
unilateral withdrawal, while acknowledging that fruitful renewed
negotiations are not now in the cards.

Currently, neither Bush nor Sharon nor Arafat has a realistic strategy
for peace. Bush might conceivably be persuaded to change his mind. But
not Arafat. And not Sharon.

