"Transfer", proclaim the banners of the opponents of uprooting the
settlements in the Gaza Strip and northern Samaria, "will not happen".
And passers-by around the country say to themselves that somewhere in
the back of their minds they remember that formula, "transfer will not
happen". Then they recall: the slogan was composed and distributed
throughout the country about 20 years ago by the left wing, which took
seriously the threats of Rabbi Meir Kahane, leader of the Kach movement,
to expel ("transfer") the Arabs of Israel and the Palestinians in the
territories to Arab countries.

The term "transfer" became one of the most repulsive in Israeli
political and moral culture. So repulsive that Yossi Sarid, for example,
stated that his movement would call upon soldiers to disobey orders to
carry out transfer, even if this meant discord within the army. The
author Amos Oz said that in the event of transfer, all the bridges
leading to the country designated to absorb the transferees should be
blown up.

The settlers have clearly not succeeded in generating the same deterrent
effect, the same sense of taboo, with regard to the uprooting of Jews as
did the left when it was a question of uprooting Arabs. This is
undoubtedly because the vast majority of the media and academia opposed
the expulsion of Arabs then, and supports the expulsion of Jews now. But
there is more. After four years of a cruel terrorist war the Israeli
public is very, very tired. It is prepared to pay heavily, to the extent
of uprooting thousands of Jews from their homes, in return for the
illusion that now it will enjoy a little peace and quiet.

The method that the settlers and their supporters hope to employ in the
course of 2005 in order to lift this evil decree is the referendum. They
seek to repeat, this time among the entire electorate, the precedent of
the vote among Likud members: about half a year ago the settlers turned
a deficit of 20 percent in the opinion polls into a victory by more than
20 percent in the actual Likud referendum. Without the Arab vote, they
argue, there is no majority favoring uprooting settlements. With hard
work, they believe, a referendum can be won.

A week ago, Pinchas Wallerstein, a settler leader, stated that if there
is no referendum, the alternative is non-violent civil disobedience,
including a readiness to go to jail. The response was overwhelming:
spontaneous demonstrations and hundreds of declarations of support by
telephone, SMS and email. His fellow members of the Council of Settlers
in Judea, Samaria and Gaza ("Yesha Council"), surprised by the extent of
support and recognizing that the popular enthusiasm was authentic,
hastened to join him.

In the media and the political establishment, on the other hand, the
reaction was anger. The attorney general even held a special night-time
session with his fellow advocates to consider what legal steps to take
against Wallerstein--which in turn only enhanced the latter's prestige
among his followers.

To summarize, this will more or less be the settlers' strategy in 2005:
massive but not violent resistance to attempts to uproot them, along the
Ukrainian model. True, the media, which in Ukraine played a key role in
the victory over the government, supports the government in Israel. But
as Wallerstein notes, we are used to confronting hostile media.

Yet the most effective means of stopping the uprooting is liable to be
one the settler leadership in fact rejects in principle: a refusal on
the part of soldiers to obey disengagement orders.

A large percentage of the Israel Defense Force's combat soldiers come
from the religious and settler communities. Many of their spiritual
teachers, the rabbis, are telling them that an order to uproot Jews is
illegal. The soldiers from the development towns, too, are
unenthusiastic, to say the least, about participating in disengagement.
All these soldiers argue that they volunteered for combat units in order
to fight the enemy, not their own people. Together, these two elements
constitute some 60 percent of the combat troops and 70 percent of the
junior officers.

The army leadership, placed in this dilemma, this week met with the
settler leaders and called upon them to take unequivocal action to
prevent soldiers from refusing orders. The settlers replied that when
more than 5,000 soldiers have already dared to sign petitions declaring
they will refuse, and when many more, particularly officers, fear to
sign, the problem is no longer that of the settlers, but rather of the
government and the army. "This is an edict," they stated, echoing an old
Jewish saying, "that the public cannot sustain".

The only way to prevent a major clash between the settlers and their
supporters and the government in 2005 is, as the settlers demand, a
referendum--or elections. If Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and his
supporters are so certain that the majority supports them, why don't
they adopt this approach, if only to prevent a schism among the people
and the army?

