In the aftermath of brutal Palestinian terrorist bombings in Jerusalem
and Haifa on December 1 and 2, and in anticipation of a massive Israeli
military response, the only step United States envoy Anthony Zinni can
take in the near term is to exercise massive pressure on Rais Yasir
Arafat to shut down the Palestinian terrorist organizations. If this
portrays Zinni as the point man for one-sided American pressure on
Arafat, rather than as a neutral mediator, then so be it. Arafat's
behavior leaves little room for neutrality.

In light of the likely Israeli response and the additional casualties to
be expected, and assuming the Palestinian Authority leadership is still
in place when the smoke clears, it behooves Zinni also to explain once
and for all to the Palestinian leadership the issue of moral
equivalency. It is illogical, insulting and immoral to equate the
deliberate targeting of Israeli civilians by Palestinians with the
deaths--however large scale and however tragic--of Palestinian civilians
who get caught up, willingly or not, in the violence, and are
inadvertently killed by the Israel Defense Forces. The first constitutes
terrorism; the second, usually termed euphemistically "collateral
damage," is terrible, whether it happens when American bombs drop on a
hospital in Afghanistan or Israeli fire hits innocent Palestinian women
and children. But it is not terrorism, and it is not the moral
equivalent of terrorism. It is what happens, tragically, when people are
obliged to defend themselves against terrorism.

Nor is it terrorism when Israel assassinates a Palestinian terrorist
activist that Arafat was supposed to have incarcerated. This is why
Israelis--those who still consider Arafat, however flawed, to be
preferable to chaos or to an even more extreme Palestinian
leadership--continue to feel justified when they demand that he first
make serious and sincere efforts to cease the violence before the
Tenet-Mitchell process can commence.

Yet we all know that this important distinction is not the only obstacle
to a ceasefire, and that a ceasefire is Zinni's task. To discuss how he
might eventually succeed, we must make two problematic assumptions.
First, we must assume that Arafat is indeed capable of making and
carrying out the strategic decision to cease Palestinian terrorism and
low-intensity warfare. Secondly, we must assume that Zinni has more
authority to pressure both sides than did his predecessors, Mitchell and
Tenet. If, and only if, these assumptions are accurate, then the
question becomes one of carrots and sticks and how to apply them. But if
either or both assumptions are not accurate, then Zinni is wasting his
time.

To facilitate his task, Zinni must take another look at the Mitchell
Commission recommendations--beyond Palestinian and Israeli 'spin'--and
note the following: There is no hard and fast sequencing in these
recommendations. Nowhere is seven days total absence of violence
stipulated as a condition for commencing the process. Nowhere is the
cooling-off period fixed at six weeks. Nowhere are the Palestinians
guaranteed a political payoff for ending violence. Demands like a
cessation of humiliating IDF roadblocks and Israeli settlement-building
are nearly as high on the Mitchell list as are demands regarding
Palestinian violence. While Israeli settlement construction is also
definitely not the moral equivalent of Palestinians killing Israelis, it
is nevertheless wrong, it violates American policy, and it can
justifiably be made a cardinal issue in Zinni's dealings with Israel.

Whatever reasons George Mitchell and his colleagues had for leaving
their timetable and sequencing arrangements ambiguous, this cannot be
compensated for by unilateral Israeli or Palestinian determinations. Nor
is the Tenet ceasefire plan sufficient to catalyze the ceasefire
process, limited as it is to strictly military security issues.

When the smoke has cleared, Zinni must tell Prime Minister Sharon and
Rais Arafat that their strategies, for peace and for war, have failed.
They are leading the region into chaos, wherein they are liable to be
replaced by even more extreme leaders. With the full backing of
President Bush, Zinni must present the two sides with a new and far more
accelerated timetable that makes clear to the Palestinians that a
serious and concerted effort on their part to enforce a ceasefire,
including the incarceration and disarming of terrorists, will be
reciprocated immediately and progressively with a series of Israeli
gestures involving reduced closure, a cessation of all settlement
construction, and a rapid transition to new political negotiations.
Zinni's telescoped timetable must recognize that the phasing of
agreements as a means of building confidence has failed abysmally in the
Israeli-Palestinian context, from Oslo all the way to Mitchell.

The overall strategy should be to separate the two sides, militarily,
politically and demographically, as quickly and effectively as
possible.

