There is no doubt that what Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon fears
most right now is for the American peace mission led by General Anthony
Zinni to push for serious political negotiations based on lifting the
siege on Palestinians, an end to Israeli aggression against the
Palestinian people, a total halt to settlement activities and an
international force providing protection to the Palestinian people.

As such, Sharon is relying on the Palestinian Authority's inability to
meet his unending and multiplying security conditions. Sharon will use
all his might to maintain the state of military confrontation because
this maintains his image as the anti-terrorism "warrior" (the title he
chose for his biography). A shift to political issues will expose the
charlatan peacemaker Sharon as what he really is - an avid opponent of
the peace process. Only this will produce the breakthrough necessary to
create new political trends inside Israeli society that are separate
from the right-wing fascist and racist trends seen today.

Now that the United States administration has commenced a diplomatic
initiative and followed it up with Zinni's visit, this breakthrough is
in American hands. Zinni's visit could be one means of exposing the
positions of both parties, demonstrating who truly desires peace. But to
do this, Zinni's mediation in practice must be based on the specific
principles outlined in Powell's speech - opposing illegal occupation,
settlement expansion, restrictions on movement, as well as violence and
terror.

Further, Zinni could help frustrate Sharon's plans by supporting the
Palestinian National Authority (PNA) in dispelling the false and
prominent impression among Palestinians that a ceasefire is the same as
acquiescing to occupation. The PNA must refute the idea that Palestinian
internal politics is at its breaking point, as well as address the
national movements that resort to gunfire only to mask their inability
to lead the public in marches against occupation. (It is important to
note that the absence of widespread participation in the Intifada gives
Israel the wrong impression that the Palestinian people are worn out and
exhausted and cannot continue to resist occupation much longer. Indeed,
the Palestinian will remains unbowed.)

After September 11, the new international climate provides both
opportunities and dead ends. For Palestinians, it has now become
impossible to rely on the Arab states or international intervention,
since all are pressing for negotiations at all cost. This has been
demonstrated through US and European pressure, starting with US demands
of the Arab countries following Powell's speech. It has also been
reflected in letters sent by President George W. Bush to several Arab
leaders, calling on them to exert pressure on the Palestinian leadership
to "get serious" about restoring calm and ending violence.

These American demands are not new, however they gain power and
influence following Secretary of State Colin Powell's speech - and
herein lies the real danger. The American administration must realize
that is does not aid its cause in using the Arab countries to pressure
Palestinians. Doing so only solidifies Palestinian desperation. The Arab
states, too, must shoulder their role as a source of support for the
Palestinian cause and a just solution according to international law.
This should be translated into a unified Arab stance and an action plan
that responds to American attempts at division.

While some Palestinians expressed the sense that Powell's speech
contained new, hopeful elements, more must soon be on the way. The visit
and mission of Zinni is a test for whether the principles offered in
Powell's speech were serious or only pretty packaging.

Indeed, US integrity in mediation is at stake. Palestinians will measure
the seriousness of the United States position in talks with the US
administration over the nature of its mediation; its understanding of
United Nations Resolutions 242 and 338 and the mechanics of the US role
in the negotiating process.

Only after these discussions will we be able to monitor how the United
States moves forward regarding United Nations Security Council
resolutions, the negotiations process and pressure applied to Israel to
respect international law. The way in which Zinni fulfills all of these
will be the true test of American intentions.

