The Oslo agreement and the Declaration of Principles list the problem of
Jerusalem as one of the final status negotiating agenda items between
Israelis and Palestinians to be negotiated and agreed on within five
years from signing the agreement. That was in 1993. Since then, the
issue of Jerusalem has featured prominently as one of the most stubborn
and challenging negotiating issues. This is due to the religious and
historic importance of the Al Haram Al Sharif/Temple Mount, as well as
the city's central position and importance in tourism and economy.

As such, it was no coincidence that the point of departure in relations
between Palestinians and Israelis from peaceful negotiations to bloody
confrontations was over the issue of the Al Haram Al Sharif. The visit
of the Israeli right-wing extremist Ariel Sharon to the Al Haram Al
Sharif/Temple Mount on September 29, 2000 provoked a unique firestorm of
public anger in Jerusalem, the rest of the West Bank and Gaza, and among
Palestinians in Israel and in the Diaspora. The wave of demonstrations
spread to all Arab and Islamic countries in a way not seen for the last
30 years.

Despite the importance of this site for Palestinians, Arabs and Muslims,
the Palestinian political position on Jerusalem and Al Haram Al Sharif
is not one of religion or history, but based in politics and law. The
entire world has managed to convince the Palestinian people that in
modern times the criteria for handling conflicts should be that of
international law and international legitimacy. That is why Palestinians
believe that since the real basis for solving this problem is United
Nations Security Council Resolution 242, which considers the Palestinian
territories to the east of the borders of 1967 illegally occupied.
Because Al Haram Al Sharif and East Jerusalem happen to fall east of the
borders of 1967, that particular place and the rest of East Jerusalem
must fall under Palestinian legal sovereignty. Any religious or historic
site to the east of these legal borders should fall under Palestinian
jurisdiction and any religious or historic site that happens to fall on
the western side of these borders should fall under Israeli
jurisdiction. The basis for this logic is the legal and modern approach
to sovereignty, which separates political sovereignty rights from
religious rights.

Therefore, if there are Jewish, Christian and Muslim religious sites
that happen to be in Palestinian sovereign territories, according to
international law they should naturally fall under Palestinian sovereign
control with full religious rights guaranteed. Religious rights should
not extend into political and legal sovereignty rights and this logic
goes both ways--Islamic and Christian sites that happen to fall west of
the 1967 borders will fall under the political sovereignty of Israel,
with complete religious rights guaranteed.

The Israeli demand for political and legal sovereignty over specific
sites in Jerusalem due to their religious and historical significance
are demands that contradict international law. If the international
community tolerates this, then one must imagine how the world will look
when everyone with religious claims over someone else's territory
demands the extension of their political and legal sovereignty over
those areas. The only logic for solving this problem is that which
separates religious rights--which should be pursued and respected--from
legal, political and sovereign rights based on international law.
Anything else will further transform the Middle East political struggle
into one of religious difference, which is the recipe for enflaming the
dispute rather than easing it, and deepening disagreements that have no
solution.

