Palestinian-Israeli relations in 2005 will probably be characterized
more by the internal conflicts they generate within each society than by
interaction between the two societies. Indeed, rather than culminating
in a renewed peace process, as some would have us believe, the
Palestinian-Israeli relationship is more likely to be a catalyst, in
late 2005 or early 2006, of yet another Israeli election.

In Israel, the dominant issue this year will be disengagement. Most
Israelis address disengagement primarily with regard to its effect on
Israeli society, rather than within the context of the peace process.
Thus, the majority believes that disengagement will pave the way toward
maintaining Israel as a Jewish and a democratic country, whether or not
it solves its problem with the Palestinians. Meanwhile a powerful,
highly motivated messianic minority, the ideological settlers, believes
that disengagement is the beginning of the end of Zionism. The clash
over disengagement between these two Israeli camps is liable to be
bloody and very painful. It will preoccupy Israeli society for the
coming year.

Further, whether or not disengagement is carried out successfully, the
government coalition that is currently being formed by Likud, Labor and
Torah Judaism is likely to collapse, for lack of an organizing
principle, once the disengagement smoke has cleared, thus precipitating
yet another Israeli election that revolves around the Palestinian issue,
about a year from now. (Indeed, if Sharon fails to form this new
coalition, elections will be upon us much earlier, and will even
jeopardize the disengagement plan.)

In Palestine, the real test for Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) in 2005 is not
getting elected; the only issue here is the size of his majority. Nor
will the focus be on a peace process with Israel, inasmuch as the coming
year will be taken up by an essentially unilateral Israeli move, and
Palestinian demands for a comprehensive peace process will be deferred.
Rather, Abu Mazen will be judged as a leader in the course of the coming
year by his ability to deliver on the principles he has outlined with
regard to Palestinian society: an end to violence, and cooptation,
rather than confrontation, in his dealings with Fateh and Hamas militants.

Here too, we are likely to witness high tensions within society,
possibly even affecting the status of the leader. If, at the end of the
day, Abu Mazen fails to institute the rule of law throughout Palestinian
society he is liable to lose the good will not only of Israelis but also
of the Bush administration, whose role will be absolutely vital if there
is to be any chance that 2006 (not 2005) will usher in a return to the
peace process.

Undoubtedly, there will be many linkages between these internal
processes on both sides. For example, if disengagement takes place in
Gaza under heavy Palestinian rocket and mortar fire, and particularly if
the firing continues even after the last Israeli has departed, then
there is little chance for either an improved security situation or
further political movement. By the same token, if a successful effort by
the Abbas government to reduce terrorism is not reciprocated by a Sharon
government move to reduce checkpoints, release prisoners and facilitate
Palestinian economic life, then the overall situation will only
deteriorate.

This is where third parties of good will, like Egypt and the West, can
make their contribution during the coming year. Not by pressing for a
peace process, it's too early for that, but rather by demanding that
Sharon produce suitable confidence-building measures, and by reassuring
Abu Mazen that a renewed peace process will come in due time if he
radically reduces violence.

There will also be linkages in 2005 with key regional events. The
outcome of the insurgency in Iraq and the next phase in US-orchestrated
pressures on Syria could have an important effect on the
Israeli-Palestinian situation.

The year 2005 can be one of successful transition--or it can plunge us
even deeper into chaos and failure.

