Q: How do you see Crown Prince Abdullah's initiative?

A: It is very interesting. I haven't heard it laid out openly by
the Crown Prince, but if what is written in Tom Friedman's article
becomes an official Saudi proposal, this is a positive development, in
that it embodies recognition of the State of Israel and acceptance of
normalization between Israel and the Arabs. I attach particular
importance to the initiative because Saudi Arabia is the defender of the
Muslim holy sites, and the conflict has been tainted recently by
religious aspects, with Islam abused by some people to justify murders
and other criminal acts.

Q: Abdullah's premise is that Israel will withdraw to the
1967 borders.

A: Israeli-Arab borders have to be determined by negotiation, not
by preconditions. Israel does not share the concept of borders embodied
in the Saudi proposal. Henry Siegman of the New York Council on Foreign
Relations has pointed out that the Saudis don't mean the exact 1967
lines, even in Jerusalem. So if borders can be negotiated, we end up
with an Israeli state alongside a Palestinian state, and Saudi Arabia
rallies the Arab League, this is an interesting development.

Q: Can the Saudis get the entire Arab League to support this
idea?

A: I find it difficult to see an Arab League consensus on this,
with the Iraqis, the Libyans and others.

Q: What's missing from the initiative?

A: The proposal--if, I emphasize, it is a proposal, because we
haven't yet heard it directly--doesn't mention many things, most
prominently the Temple Mount issue in Jerusalem and the refugee/right of
return issue, that have to be negotiated. In connection with the
refugees, Israel's view of a successful two-state solution includes a
statement regarding the end of conflict. So if this is indeed a serious
proposal it must stipulate that this is the end of the conflict. This is
the litmus test. Then the proposal can afford not to mention certain
final status issues.

Q: What's the next step?

A: This shouldn't be left as just an interview or an idea hovering
over the Middle East or Washington. The next step could be mutual visits
or Saudi-Israeli negotiations or Arab League negotiations with Israel.
If, on the other hand, this initiative remains in the PR phase, the
impression will be that it was meant to improve the Saudi image in the US.

Q: The Saudis' reply is apparently that Israel should first
make peace, then they will talk about normalization.

A: If Saudi Arabia wants to play a role in peacemaking, then we
need to talk.

Q: Can Prime Minister Ariel Sharon accept the Saudi
territorial demands, even with minor adjustments?

A: The premise of the peace process, including the Oslo accords,
is a territorial settlement based on [United Nations Security Council]
Resolution 242. I don't believe a new basis is needed. We know there is
a border controversy. Sharon is the first Israeli prime minister to
agree up front to a Palestinian state. At Camp David in July 2000, where
I participated in the negotiations, the border issue was not the reason
for failure. It was clear that there would be no complete return to the
1967 border, the armistice lines, and that the main settlement blocs
would be incorporated into Israel. If Saudi Arabia wants the 1967 lines,
this goes beyond Camp David, which failed over the refugee and Temple
Mount issues. So we need to see a concrete proposal.

Q: One of the reasons given for the failure of Camp David was
the Saudi refusal to support compromises by Yasir Arafat. Have the
Saudis now reversed course?

A: The notion that the Arab world was not prepared to support
Arafat at Camp David is unfounded criticism. Had Arafat accepted an
agreement at Camp David, he would have had the Arabs behind him. It is
patronizing, childish and naive to think that Arafat needs this
legitimacy. He has to make the courageous historical compromise
decision, then most of the other Arabs will support him. Menachem Begin
didn't wait for the Arab world when he made peace with Egypt, nor did
Rabin with Jordan or when he signed Oslo. The idea that Arafat needs a
cradle or else he cannot sign is patronizing. "Peace of the brave" means
that Arafat has to be brave.

