In the course of nearly 35 years since the Six-Day War, major changes in
the Middle East have taken the form of strategic surprises. The October
1973 Arab attack on Israel; Egyptian President Anwar Sadat's November
1977 visit to Jerusalem; the rise of Iran's Ayatollah Khomeini in 1978
and '79; Iraqi President Saddam Hussein's invasion of Kuwait in
1990--these and more were events which, for better or for worse, took
the region by surprise and influenced the course of events for years to
come.

Crown Prince Abdullah's proposal for "full Arab normalization with
Israel in exchange for full Israeli withdrawal from all occupied
territories" is clearly a positive and welcome event. But is it another
of these strategic turning points? To find out, it must be addressed at
this early stage with questions rather than answers--questions that
elucidate the possible intentions and ramifications of the initiative.

First, why Abdullah, and why now? Is Abdullah's main purpose, as some
allege, to improve the Saudi image in the US and give Saudi Arabia
leverage with Washington with regard to the latter's plans to attack
Iraq? Or is the real objective indeed (in the words of Abdullah's policy
adviser, Adel Jubeir) "to send a signal to the Israeli public that peace
is possible"? Is Abdullah so concerned over the ramifications for the
Arab world of the current escalation between Israelis and Palestinians
that he is prepared to put his prestige on the line in order to revive
the process, or does he have a hidden agenda that will soon emerge?

In this connection, what will happen at the Beirut Arab League Summit on
March 27? Abdullah is a tough Arab nationalist whose country is keeper
of the Muslim holy places and is the economic mainstay of the
confrontation states and of much of the Arab media. Will he stick with
the elegant simplicity of his formula, or will it suffer the fate of its
predecessor, Prince (now King) Fahd's August 1981 offer to recognize
Israel's right to live in peace, which emerged from the Fez Arab League
summit replete with a demand for the Palestinian refugees' right of
return to Israel, and even then was not approved by Syria and the
Palestine Liberation Organization? Can Abdullah "deliver" them this time?

Is the Arab League summit the most suitable and significant place to
discuss this initiative? Obviously, Abdullah wants as many Arab
countries as possible to line up behind his offer of normalization. But
the other half of the equation--broadly speaking, Israeli-Palestinian
peace--is up to Israel's Ariel Sharon, Palestinians' Yasir Arafat and
almost certainly US President George W. Bush. Yet these three key actors
have demonstrated repeatedly in the course of the past year that none of
them has a strategy for peace. Two of them, and possibly all three, will
not even be in Beirut in late March. Incidentally, does Abdullah
envisage normalization in return for Israeli-Palestinian peace only, or
is the Israeli-Syrian border also included in his initiative?

Then there are the essentially Israeli considerations: will the offer of
normalization persuade Israelis to give up the territories? On the one
hand, most Israelis have become rather cynical about the ostensible
benefits of peace and normalization. We have had peace with Egypt for
over 20 years, and President Husni Mubarak won't even set foot in
Israel. We expected normalization with the Arab world back at the 1991
Madrid Conference and again after the 1993 Oslo signing, and were
broadly disappointed.

On the other hand, a majority of Israelis supported Ehud Barak's
readiness to give up nearly all the territories, with compensation for
annexation of settlement blocs and Jewish neighborhoods across the Green
Line in Jerusalem. The death and destruction of the past 18 months have
apparently not weakened--indeed, may have strengthened--that readiness,
even if Israel's current prime minister is not a candidate for serious
territorial concessions. Israelis were even prepared to back Barak, and
before him prime ministers Rabin, Peres and Netanyahu, in giving up more
or less all of the Golan in return for peace with Syria. So if the
territorial stipulation of Abdullah's formula is even a little flexible,
it may encourage Israelis to search for a leadership that will meet him
halfway.

In this regard, can the attractions of Abdullah's proffered
pay-off--normalization with the Arab world--compensate for Yasir
Arafat's almost complete loss of credibility in the eyes of Israelis? Is
this initiative actually meant to bypass Arafat, whom even Arab leaders
no longer trust? Or, in contrast, could Abdullah's offer constitute the
missing pan-Arab support that will finally enable the Palestinian leader
to acknowledge a genuine two state solution that recognizes Israel's
right to exist as a Jewish state (i.e., no right of return and a
recognized status on the Temple Mount)? In other words, is this the
political ingredient that was lacking at Camp David?

The substantive issue is leadership: will Abdullah emerge as a great and
persistent Middle East leader in an era of mediocre leadership? This is
the key to transforming his initiative into a genuine strategic turning
point.

