Although it served in wartime, the Likud-Labor government was not really
a "government of national unity." During its tenure, terrorists murdered
more than 650 Israelis (the equivalent of some 30,000 out of the 250
million Arabs in the Middle East, when measured in proportion to the
size of the population), but the Labor ministers, and certainly their
members of Knesset, frequently behaved like hostile members of the
opposition--as if these were normal times.

Now that the government has fallen due to what most of the public
considers to be "primaries tactics," not a few right wingers are happy.
The settlers especially were glad "to finally be rid of those left
wingers." That is an emotional reaction, certainly justified in terms of
the left's behavior toward them, including dismantling the outposts for
obviously political motives. But paradoxically the true interests of the
right, including the settlers, are liable to suffer in the absence of a
government that comprises representatives of the left.

Example: Despite United States President Bush's speech of June 24, the
"road map" presented on behalf of the US administration by Assistant
Secretary of State William Burns demands that Israel pay the main price
for the terrorist war initiated by Yasir Arafat two years ago. And the
Arabs, at least in the first phase, are not even required to end all
terrorist attacks. All they are asked to do is declare that they "oppose
violence." This provision, like the establishment of a Palestinian state
along the 1967 borders or the abandoning of the US demand to collect
illegal weapons--a provision the Americans insisted on in the past--are
unacceptable to the responsible Israeli left as well. But when that left
is in the opposition, the political dynamic is liable to cause them to
avoid standing by the government to rebuff American pressures even
regarding demands that they oppose. In terms of the role of American
Jewry as well, the administration can apply greater pressure than
against a government in which the left is represented.

This holds for the settlements, too: the government that fell maintained
the status quo, i.e., no new settlements. But there was also no
hindrance to the natural development of existing settlements.
Considering that the brunt of American pressure will now be directed, in
accordance with the "road map," against the settlements, it is very
important to renew the coalition agreement on this matter. And because
Labor is not likely to return to the coalition prior to elections, this
can only happy if elections are moved up.

Israel's ability to wage war against terrorist attacks, most of which
take place near the majority of the settlements, is liable to be
weakened when the Ministry of Defense is not occupied by a minister who
is at least formally identified with what is called in Israel "the peace
camp." Even at the height of the terrorism, the world behaved
hypocritically. Rather than supporting Israel when it was fighting
terrorism, it frequently supported the Arab terrorists. Now that Shaul
Mofaz is minister of defense, this tendency is likely to be
strengthened. And the settlers, who in any event have suffered the most
from this war of terror and attrition, are now liable to be attacked
even more heavily.

The staggering economy is liable to totter even further without a broad
coalition. The smaller factions within a narrow right wing coalition
will have the economic blackmail power they lacked in the previous
coalition. The settlers, with their commitment to what they call the
"community of Israel" (Klal Yisrael), are certainly responsible in this
regard too. Accordingly they too should issue a call for early
elections, so that once the petty primaries that brought about the
collapse of the government are out of the way it will be possible to
reconstitute a broad coalition.

The prime minister should announce immediately that he has no intention
of fulfilling the "prophecy" of holding the elections on time, i.e., in
October 2003. He should opt for elections now, meaning in 90 days. Such
a responsible act would merit public appreciation. It would also deny
the left the opportunity to score points as a consequence of the ongoing
social and economic crisis or of other blunders--and there will be not a
few blunders--that take place during the tenure of a narrow coalition.

All the opinion polls predict that the parties of the right, led by the
Likud, will win a clear and unambiguous victory in the next elections.
Following the elections it would be for the best to return Labor to the
coalition; but if that does not happen, then better that there quickly
emerge in Israel a government that enjoys a stable majority not only
among the public, but in the Knesset as well.

