When seasoned Israeli political actors and observers as diverse as Dan
Meridor (former Likud minister, currently Center Party minister) on the
Right and Shlomo Avineri (former Director General of the Foreign
Ministry) on the Left reach the same conclusion regarding the need for
unilateral Israeli redeployment--it's time for a serious public debate.
Both concur that traditional Israeli political discourse regarding the
fate of the West Bank and Gaza is bankrupt. The Right's contention that
Israel can hold onto the territories and compel Palestinian compliance
has failed. But so has the Left's advocacy of a far-reaching compromise
with the PLO. The only route we have not yet tried is unilateral
separation.

The advantages of withdrawing unilaterally from the Gaza Strip and the
West Bank heartland and dismantling the settlements there are manifest.
Since negotiations with the PLO are totally stalemated and terrorist
attacks inside Israel are rampant, a unilateral initiative is called for
to improve both our negotiating position and our defenses. To a large
extent it would end the evils of occupation, for both Israelis and
Palestinians. It would radically reduce the destructive humiliation of
our Palestinian neighbors. It would constitute a major step toward
braking Israel's current demographic slide toward either a binational
state or apartheid.

We could build a border fence separating Israel from the West Bank that
virtually stops the penetration of suicide bombers; the fence around
Gaza has accomplished this admirably. The new fence would follow the
Green Line in most places, but include the major settlement blocs,
thereby creating, for the first time, a clearly delineated border. The
areas remaining in Israeli hands, Greater Jerusalem and the Jordan
Valley, would continue to constitute adequate territorial incentives for
the PLO to negotiate a final status agreement. In any case, this
initiative would leave refugees and most strategic security issues for
future talks.

This separation plan would create for the first time a considerable
degree of public consensus in Israel regarding the nature of future
territorial coexistence with a Palestinian state. It would to an extent
restore the unanimity that characterized Israeli society prior to 1967,
when we had "indefensible" borders and knew exactly what we had to do if
attacked. Like the case of the withdrawal from Lebanon in May 2000, the
public would judge that on balance, it was a good idea, long overdue.
Any new Palestinian attack on Israel would be considered an act of war
by a neighboring sovereign state.

However, just as with Lebanon, there are clear drawbacks to the plan. It
does not solve the Israeli-Palestinian dispute. As in the Lebanon case,
unilateral withdrawal is liable to be seen by some Palestinians as an
act of Israeli weakness, thereby provoking yet further attacks and
making future negotiations harder. Why should Palestinians negotiate if
more terrorist atrocities will force Israel to deliver yet more
territory free of charge? Unlike the Lebanon case, in the West Bank the
international community is liable to refuse to recognize the new borders
and to accuse Israel of de facto annexation. Nor is there an obvious
solution for those Palestinians whose villages are included within the
new borders. To the east, Palestinians might now drill new wells in the
Yarkon-Taninim Acquifer under Western Samaria that adversely affect
Israel's access to vital water resources. Even those who argue that we
should have ended the occupation years ago might hesitate to end it in
the face of the current terrorist offensive.

Apropos Lebanon, one could also argue that "the jury is still out"
regarding the efficacy of Israel's unilateral withdrawal there.
Hizballah, with Iranian and Syrian help, is building fortified
emplacements and acquiring long-range rockets. If the situation on
Israel's northern border deteriorates, we may yet wish to reconsider
whether our withdrawal there was a good idea. This could have
implications for unilateral withdrawal from the West Bank.

Thus there are compelling arguments for and against unilateral
withdrawal. The most striking aspect of the debate is that some 50
percent of Israelis support the idea, yet not a single political party
has adopted it. Hence, under current conditions, it is a non-starter
politically. All the more reason why it should be the subject of a far
more penetrating debate at the national level. It is entirely possible
that the considerable strategic advantages of unilateral withdrawal will
be seen to outweigh the drawbacks.

