Q: What is your position on unilateral redeployment?

A: I'm very strongly in favor of building an effective fence and
other barriers along the Green Line, mainly in the central part of
Israel, say from Mei Ami to Latrun. This would be a technical defensive
measure to make the movement of terrorists into Israel more difficult.
It would be a partial but necessary measure.

Q: Can this be effective if the Israel Defense Forces are
busy defending the settlements beyond that fence?

A: As deputy minister of defense I headed a project in the year 2000
to prepare a unilateral separation plan for Prime Minister Barak in case
the Camp David talks failed. This did not include dismantling
settlements, but it examined the practical implications, so I'm very
familiar with the facts. I drew the map. I can speak about it
authoritatively.

Q: Could you relate, then, to a plan that involves
withdrawing to the settlement blocs near the Green Line and dismantling
the settlements in Gaza and the West Bank heartland, while remaining in
the Jordan Valley and Greater Jerusalem?

A: The plan means the de facto annexation of 30 percent of the West
Bank, half in the Jordan Valley, which you have to keep if there is no
agreement, and half in the settlement blocs. Once you put an effective
fence on the eastern side of the settlement blocs, this is de facto
annexation. If makes you the total sovereign in the settlement bloc
areas. It includes around 70,000-100,000 Palestinians who reside in
these areas.

All the experts on international law told us that this would bring about
a terrible response. The international community, let alone the Arab
world, would accuse us of annexation. Terrorism wouldn't stop; it would
use the de facto annexation as a pretext to continue. Indeed, terrorism
would increase to show that it doesn't work for us to take Arab
territory and Arab population by force. Terrorism would gain more
legitimacy from the international community. The fence would prevent
penetration into the settlement blocs but wouldn't stop the annexed
Palestinians from fighting from inside. Nor would the fence stop rockets
and mortars, for example, fired from Salfit toward Ariel. So even
settlements included inside the fence would be easy targets.

Q: How would unilateral redeployment affect Israeli deterrence?

A: The withdrawal would send a very bad message regarding deterrence.
The Palestinians would have no incentive to negotiate and every
incentive to keep fighting.

Q: Even a negotiated and agreed plan for Israel to keep the
settlement blocs, such as was discussed at Camp David and Taba, would
leave some Palestinians inside Israel.

A: The agreed maps I know would reduce this number to a few thousand.
But under unilateral withdrawal, what do you do with them? You can't
annex them, you don't want to make them citizens, and you don't want to
impose a new military government.

Q: Won't your plan of building a fence directly along the
Green Line be seen as a de-facto border also?

A: No. I would not redeploy the IDF [Israel Defense Forces]. It would
remain in the West Bank and Gaza to secure the settlements. Having said
that, I have no problem declaring that long segments of the future
Israeli-Palestinian border will be identical with the Green Line that
I'm fortifying, for example between Kfar Saba and Qalqilya, where in any
case we have no room to maneuver.

Q: If you leave 50,000 settlers and the army beyond the fence
this isn't separation at all.

A: I don't believe there is an Israeli government that has the
political power to dismantle settlements against the settlers' will and
without an agreement.

Q: Do you believe that an Israeli government could dismantle
these settlements if it did have an agreement?

A: Yes. The public is ready to pay the price if the reward is peace,
but not if the conflict continues under different conditions.

Q: Opinion polls show that around 50 percent of Israelis
already favor unilaterally dismantling settlements. Why shouldn't the
Labor Party consider this as its policy?

A: A serious party cannot take something non-implementable and make
it a slogan. This idea has become popular due to public despair. When
you give the public the details, it reconsiders its support. Look, I'm a
medical doctor. This is like a patient with terminal cancer suggesting
that he drink hydrochloric acid to burn out the cancer. This is not a
solution. I don't agree that there's no hope. Things are not static.
That's why I favor [Knesset Chairman Avraham] Burg's going to Ramallah
[to address the Palestinian National Assembly].

