Q: What is your first general impression of the Saudi
initiative?

A: I think it is the most significant thing to come from the Arab
world since the convening of the Madrid peace conference in 1991. I
believe this is a very courageous step by Saudi Arabia. I really hope
that the United States will not try to undermine these efforts and will
concentrate on the strategic importance of this initiative. I hope that
the United States will understand that what it will take to bring us and
the Israelis outside of this current deteriorating situation is not
going to be this security arrangement program or that security
arrangement program but part of a package that can provide for a
political hope and political horizon and political solution.

I hope that this Saudi message will reach the Israeli people to show
them that there is an alternative and that the alternative is peace and
the shortest way to peace is ending the Israeli occupation.

Q: What do you see as the major pitfalls lying in the path of
this plan?

A: I hope that, first of all, the Arab countries in the next Arab
summit in Beirut at the end of the month will introduce a resolution to
adopt [Saudi] Prince Abdullah's ideas. I hope that this will be followed
up by real, hard work to establish a partnership with the Europeans and
the Russians and the Non-Aligned Movement and I hope that after that a
dialogue will begun between the Arabs and the United States in order to
maximize this effort.

Q: The question that a lot of Palestinians seem to be asking
is, what about the refugees?

A: Well, I don't think that you can say that the Saudi ideas or
initiative undermines the refugees in any way. I think that the Saudi
[ideas] are based on the relevant [United Nations] Security Council
resolutions and that this [initiative] is consistent because the refugee
problem is going to be solved in accordance with Resolution 194.

That is what I meant [when I asked] for the Americans not to undermine
these events by discussing the details. The details are a matter of
negotiations and not for the Saudis.

Q: If that is the case, then aren't we back to square one?
The details are what Palestinians and Israelis are having trouble with,
aren't they?

A: No, I don't think that we have trouble with the details. I think
we came a long way in the previous negotiations and the Israelis must
make up their minds. If the Israelis want real full peace with
normalization, that requires real full withdrawal to the June 4, 1967
borders and a just solution to the refugees based on Resolution 194.

Q: Is it possible that the rest of the Arab world might make
peace and leave the Palestinians behind?

A: That is impossible.

