There is no doubt that the ongoing struggle between Palestinians and
Israelis will also impact internal Palestinian and Israeli politics. For
example, the most recent internal Palestinian crisis resulted, among
other things, from the ongoing debate among Palestinians as to whether
or not their leadership is adopting the political line desired by the
Palestinian public.

It also reflects the Palestinian "reformers'" debate over and evaluation
of the last two years of the Al Aqsa Intifada. Some Palestinians believe
that changes in the leadership structure and performance could
contribute to increased political efficiency and benefit the cause of
the Palestinian people. Others believe that the changes being demanded
by external players, including the United States and Israel, are
intended to affect change in the leadership structure that would
facilitate "progress" in the peace negotiations. As such, the democratic
battle that took place between the legislative and executive authorities
over the last several weeks was partially seen here as a struggle
between the will of those external powers (with some local expressions)
and the will of those who do not want changes that are specifically
intended to extract Palestinian political concessions.

On the Israeli scene, however, the linkage between the government crisis
and the political process is much more clear. Despite the fact that the
direct cause of the crisis (i.e., the budget) was not related to the
Palestinian-Israeli struggle, the debate over the budget did reflect the
priorities of the Israeli government's expenditures: whether to finance
settlements, expansion and defense or support a liberal social agenda.
The debate in Israel that led to the fall of the national unity
government is also symptomatic of the failure of the main players to
agree on the policies of the government vis-a-vis Palestinians, and the
way that the government handles peace proposals.

Looking at this for the long term, one can only come to the conclusion
that the fall of the unity government is the beginning of the countdown
towards the end of the era of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. That era was
distinctive in three characteristics: first, the prime minister's
domination pushing the government towards the far right wing; second,
the absence of any opposition, which augmented this government's power;
and third, unusually smooth relations with a right-wing administration
in Washington, which relies on votes influenced by the American
pro-Israel lobby.

Given the significance of this juncture and turbulence in the two
political systems, it would be very useful if the Israeli and
Palestinian publics and their representatives recognized that we are
quickly nearing the evaporation of the window of opportunity for
historic compromise. This window is closing for two reasons: the
radicalizing effect of these bloody confrontations, which are pushing
the public away from the spirit of peaceful compromise, and because of
Israeli illegal settlement expansion that both brought about the failure
of the Oslo peace process and is now jeopardizing the possibility for
two states along the internationally recognized 1967 border.

