Ever since the occupation of the West Bank in 1967, there has been a
possibility of its return to Jordanian sovereignty or--at later
stages--a possibility that Jordan would resume an active role in its
affairs. Notwithstanding the Arab League's decision in November 1974 to
"delegate" the PLO as claimant for the future of the territories, Jordan
remained the most salient candidate for a return of the territories to
Arab sovereignty.

This finally changed only with the failure of the Hussein-Peres
initiative of 1987 (which was rejected by Prime Minister Shamir) and the
outbreak of the first intifada, following which Jordan formally declared
its disengagement from the affairs of the territories. The Oslo accords
appeared initially to create a positive framework for
Israeli-Palestinian agreement, thus finally settling the conflict. The
course of events since then, and especially the outbreak of the second
intifada, led to a major deterioration in Israeli-Palestinian relations
and to increased doubts that they could be repaired.

Until Jordan decided on its disengagement from the West Bank in the late
1980s, its interests there were clear and understandable. First, the
West Bank was an integral part of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, which
sought to restore its sovereignty there. Second, control over the holy
places in Jerusalem had been one of the main reasons for the Jordanian
intervention in Palestine in 1948 and remained a critical goal for the
kingdom. Third, the emergence of a Palestinian state in the West Bank
that could become irredentist toward the East Bank might be a cause for
concern unless arrangements were made that would effectively limit such
tendencies. These goals and concerns indeed dictated an active policy of
engagement by Jordan.

Presently however, in view of the enormous tasks and problems that the
kingdom faces--national consolidation, the buttressing of a specific
/Jordanian/ national identity, and severe economic challenges--the
tendency of the regime and political elites in Jordan is to reject
significant reengagement in the affairs of Palestine. This position
appears indeed to be realistic and to possess internal logic.

Clearly, therefore, Jordan is not currently ready to shoulder a major
responsibility for the West Bank or to seek to assign itself the role of
principal interlocutor with Israel concerning its future. Yet at the
same time any major development in Palestine would ineluctably affect
Jordan, thus requiring a measure of Jordanian activity or at least prior
planning. For example, extreme Israeli punitive actions in reaction to
Palestinian terrorism might lead to Palestinian migration to Jordan.
(Jordanian concern about the location of the separation fence is a case
in point.) Indeed, precisely for the very reasons that Jordan now
prefers non-engagement, it might have to modify its position if
circumstances change.

Analytically, one could differentiate between several categories of
possible Jordanian involvement. First, following the establishment of a
Palestinian state, there might be moves toward the establishment of some
type of deep cooperation between Jordan and Palestine. While such a
scenario does not require very salient short-term activity, it might
nevertheless call for a measure of planning as well as Jordanian
attention to the conditions attendant on the formation of a Palestinian
state, be it as a result of unilateral Israeli withdrawal or of an
agreement.

Second, Jordan may wish to be active in well-defined issue areas where
its interests are paramount, such as the Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif.
Jordan has never given up its interests there; they are recognized
formally in the Jordanian-Israeli peace treaty.

Third, Jordan could play an active role in the process leading to the
establishment of a Palestinian state. While this is less likely, it is
not impossible, insofar as it is difficult to predict and assess future
developments.

One might wonder whether Jordan--precisely in order to protect its vital
national interests as a /Jordanian/ state--might not find itself
compelled to reengage if critical circumstances changed: first and
foremost, if there were a readiness on the part of significant sectors
in the Palestinian community to accept such a Jordanian role. This could
result, for example, from continued deterioration of the situation in
the West Bank and the collapse of the Palestinian Authority or,
alternatively, as a consequence of advanced Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations that touch on important Jordanian interests, and a decision
to invite Jordan to take part in them. In any event, the objective would
be the establishment of a stable Palestinian state.

The part of the Israeli public that is genuinely interested in peace and
security would most probably prefer some form of Jordanian reengagement
in developments in the West Bank. It should be clear, however, that the
best way to facilitate such a move--to the extent that it depends on the
Israeli side--is for Israel to be more accommodating in terms of
withdrawal from territories and concessions in Jerusalem and the holy
places.

Jordan, the Palestinian community, and Israel find themselves in a bind.
Political, strategic, demographic, and economic developments in the West
Bank affect all of them. There is a need for much more thinking and
planning on the part of all three actors with regard to their future
interrelationships.

