Q: How do you feel about the creation of the position of
prime minister?

A: This new government, and the appointment of a prime
minister, is a positive step towards developing and improving the
internal state of affairs and towards institution-building that will get
us to the point of establishing an independent Palestinian state.

Q: Do you feel that this change was the result of external
or internal pressure?

A: This was a Palestinian demand before it was an external
demand. The Palestinian demand corresponded with the international
demand, and the Palestinian Legislative Council agreed to it and the
Central Council agreed to it in principle. The Palestinian Legislative
Council then put it into law and amended the Basic Law.

Q: Some people seem irritated by the external pressures?

A: The irritation is at the external interference in the
formation of the government. In the end, though, there was agreement on
the names of the members of the new government, and a decision was made.
The Palestinian Legislative Council specified the powers of the prime
minister, while the president, Abu Ammar [Yasser Arafat], continues to
hold powers. The most important of these powers are that he appoints the
prime minister and can dismiss him at will. In the end, he remains
president.

Q: What does the new government plan to begin working on
first?

A: This government has an ambitious work plan. This plan
affirms that efforts should continue to end the occupation, to find a
solution for peace, and to obtain national rights for the Palestinian
people. The most important issue before the cabinet is the continuation
of reform and making laws operative. The most important laws that need
to be worked on are the social solidarity law, the parties law, and the
social security law.

There is also an opportunity before this government to continue
negotiations with the Israelis to apply the roadmap and reach a final
solution. The new government also has a responsibility to rebuild the
structure of all of the ministries and study their plans for the future.

Q: It was expected that Abu Mazen [Prime Minister Mahmoud
Abbas] would request a one-year ceasefire. Do you think he is moving in
this direction?

A: I think that Abu Mazen, the new government and Abu Ammar are
seeking to reach an understanding that will end the occupation and stop
violence on both sides.

Q: Four days ago, the roadmap
                                                 was made official?

A: The Executive Council of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the previous and current cabinets demand Israeli
compliance with the roadmap. We agreed to the roadmap even though we
have many concerns over it, but as an international plan promoted by the
United States of America and the Quartet--the Europeans and the United
Nations and Russia--we accepted it, and ask that Israel agree to it.

Q: Are there indications from abroad that pressure will be
placed on Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon in terms of the roadmap?

A: We say that the United States of America must not rule with
two different measures. It is able to force Israel, just as it has
forced major changes in the region. If it is serious about bringing
about a just peace, then it can pressure Israel.

Our goal is really only to live under a true and just peace that will
guarantee the Palestinian people's right to establish an independent
Palestinian state with Jerusalem as its capital, and a fair solution to
the issue of refugees--return of refugees on the basis of international
law. This is the message that Abu Mazen forwarded in his political
plans, for which he received the confidence of the Palestinian
Legislative Council.

Q: Your husband, Khalil al Wazir, was assassinated in Tunis
by Israeli operatives in 1988. When you remember Abu Jihad, how do you
think he would view the current situation?

A: Abu Jihad, may his soul rest in peace, was part of the
struggle to obtain an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as
its capital. It's true that Israel committed a heinous crime in the
assassination of Abu Jihad, but the interest of the people and our
belief in what he stood for is to continue in the struggle to obtain the
goal of all of the martyrs. The goal Abu Jihad was struggling for was
the establishment of an independent Palestinian state with Jerusalem as
its capital, on all of the lands that were occupied in 1967. He believed
in this objective and he felt that we could obtain it by armed struggle.
If we can obtain it through peaceful negotiations, then we will have
also met our goal.

Q: In your view, are Palestinians closer or further from
this prospect?

A: That depends on the belief of the Israeli people in the
necessity and importance of peace. Abu Mazen was still taking his oath
of office as Israeli tanks and helicopters were invading the Gaza Strip
to commit a massacre in the Shuja'iyyeh neighborhood of Gaza City.
Twelve martyrs fell in this massacre, and more than 65 were wounded.
That was a poor message to send to the new prime minister.

