Whether or not Israeli disengagement from the Gaza Strip takes place,
and whether or not Egypt's projected involvement in Gaza Strip security
reaches fruition--Jordan's parallel involvement in West Bank security
will, at best, be a far more modest undertaking. The contrast between
the Jordanian approach to security involvement and that of Egypt is
illustrative of the different ways in which the Palestinian dynamic
affects the Palestinians' two Arab neighbors.

Egypt is motivated to offer to intervene in Gaza by the perception that
post-disengagement Gaza will pose a security danger: a radical Islamist
takeover that threatens to overflow into Egypt, where the Muslim
Brotherhood is considered a major potential threat to the regime. Egypt
also apparently considers its growing involvement with security planning
for Israeli disengagement as a means of buying American good will at a
time when it cannot satisfy United States demands for democratization
and human rights reforms. Egypt, after all, gets over two billion
dollars a year in US aid, and recently received an additional large sum
linked to its role in the 2003 Iraq war. Moreover Egypt sees its
involvement in Gaza as a way of reasserting its traditional inter-Arab
leadership role at a time when the US presence in Iraq has shattered any
pretension on the part of the Arab world to be in control.

Jordan, in contrast, perceives no similar security danger emanating from
the West Bank. Not only is Israel not withdrawing from most of the West
Bank, but Hamas has been rendered much weaker there than in Gaza, and in
any case Jordan's Muslim Brotherhood is integrated into parliament and
is not viewed as a threat to the regime. Nor does Jordan feel any
obligation to compensate Washington for a perceived failure to deliver
on reform. Indeed, its model of gradual, top-down reform is highly
regarded and has given it leadership status in western eyes. And at the
inter-Arab level Jordan, a small country that has been maneuvering
successfully among the larger and more powerful states that surround it,
perceives no need to compete with Egypt.

Jordan will continue to train Palestinian security personnel: King
Abdullah II confirmed this with Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei in late June.
But Amman apparently does not intend to exceed the parameters of
security assistance it provided in the past--it has in any case
reportedly trained more than 5,000 Palestinian policemen and officers
over the past 10 years. It might be prepared to consider deeper
involvement--meaning a security role on the ground in the West Bank,
similar to what Egypt is contemplating in the Gaza Strip and on its side
of the Philadelphi road--but only if, and when, Israel withdraws from
all of Judea and Samaria and/or reengages with the Palestinians in a
roadmap-like peace process. In that contingency, Amman would have a
profound demographic security interest in ensuring a stable transfer of
power in the West Bank and preventing the kind of chaos that is liable
to push Palestinians to seek to cross the border into Jordan.

Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is hardly likely to implement such a
comprehensive West Bank disengagement that includes the Jordan Valley.
In any case the Hashemite Kingdom has, since the 1980s, abjured any
patronage role or other form of direct involvement in the affairs of
Palestine--a policy currently expressed in the "Jordan first" slogan
seen everywhere in the kingdom. Yet some Israeli strategic planners and
political leaders, who apparently are not listening to the Egyptian and
Jordanian leadership, persist in thinking that what's best for Egypt and
Jordan is to intervene in Palestine and help ensure security and
stability where Israel and the Palestinian Authority have failed, and to
that end even to absorb excess Palestinian population!

Egypt may have its own reasons for accepting a role on the ground in
Palestine--but it is hardly likely to open its border with Gaza to
Palestinian migration. As for Jordan, it apparently has every reason to
ignore the invitation.

