Q: According to the Israeli daily /Haaretz/, Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon told his cabinet on June 1st that his plan to
disengage from the Gaza Strip might include a Jordanian presence in the
West Bank. What would be the advantage to Israel of such an arrangement?

A: I think that what Sharon says is just for Israeli and
international public opinion to market himself as a peacemaker, but
nothing will happen in the next six to seven months. Sharon is always
talking about peace while doing things on the ground [that contravene
peace]. About a Jordanian, Egyptian, or any Arab role, this is not
clear. He may plan for a Jordanian role, but the other parties have to
participate in these plans. The Egyptian side has agreed to a role; up
to now we haven't heard from Jordan.

Sharon can't put conditions on Egypt or Jordan in order to disengage
from Gaza. The Israelis are disengaging because they have come to the
conclusion that they cannot rule over the Palestinian people. This
statement was made for the benefit of the public and his party.

Q: What would be the pros and cons of such a role--training
police, advising, etc.--for Jordan?

A: There have been no arrangements for disengagement from the
West Bank, so the Jordanian role of giving advice on security is not
clear. It will be two to three years before Israel's plans for the West
Bank are clear. Sharon wants to leave the Gaza Strip and continue
occupying the West Bank forever while declaring it legal according to
the Americans. The real battle will be in the West Bank.

The Jordanians will not be interested in a role in the West Bank,
because history is going forward, not backward. Jordan is stable now,
and its government will think many times before taking on such a role in
the West Bank. Jordan has no interest in the West Bank at this time,
because the Palestinian issue could threaten the stability of the
kingdom and upset the delicate balance between majority and minority.

Q: Would the Palestinian Authority welcome a Jordanian role
in disengagement? Where could Jordan be useful?

A: The PA will accept a Jordanian role in training the
security forces in Palestine. We want Arab participation in the building
of our own state and the training of our people, but any other role is
not accepted. The Palestinian people want all Arab countries to stand on
our side against the Israeli occupier. We will not accept for any Arab
country to be a mediator. We accept them as partners.

Q: What about the militias and the Palestinian street?

A: We have good relations with all Arab countries and Arab
people; they all help us in this catastrophe in which we live. Jordan
and Egypt are good supporters of the Palestinian cause. Having good
relations with Jordan is acceptable to everyone, but any other role is
not appropriate at this time.

Sharon's plan is just a bluff to show the world that he is a peacemaker,
but we are sure that he is a killer. He is trying to involve Arab
countries in this conflict as mediators.

