Q: What is your forecast regarding the water shortage in
the Palestinian Authority?

A: The water shortage in Gaza is catastrophic. The quality of
water is also catastrophic. In the Gaza Strip they need an additional 30
to 40 million cubic meters of water a year for drinking. Nothing will
help but desalinating seawater or brackish water and building an
advanced water system, and establishing a modern sewage system. We know
where the desalination plant will be located, and American funds for
construction have been allocated, including for a central distribution
pipeline the length of the Strip. The plans are ready, but you can't
build under fire. You don't even need peace, just a ceasefire. The cost
to Palestinians (operation and maintenance costs, without capital
return) will be 35-40 cents per cubic meter if the Americans build the
installation as a grant.

Q: And in the West Bank?

A: South of Jerusalem there is a shortage of water, and many
villages are not hooked up to water systems. In our extended talks with
the Palestinians they were presented with proposals for increasing
supply immediately: some 30 wells to be drilled in the area of the
"nature reserve" transferred under the Wye agreement, which would supply
25 million cubic meters a year to the Hebron and Yatta regions. Here
again, the drilling is not taking place due to the Intifada. The plans
and permissions were delivered to the Palestinians in January 2001. The
Americans have to drill the wells, which are deep and expensive and
require peace and quiet. Israel is prepared to give all the technical
support. There are additional reserves of water in the Judea area.

North of Jerusalem there are no more unexploited water sources and there
is no solution but to bring desalinated water from the Mediterranean
Sea. I have proposed that the international community build a
desalination plant at Hadera with a supply pipeline to the northern West
Bank. The Americans will build the facility and the additional donor
countries perhaps will lay the distribution pipes for the Palestinians.
Israel will allocate the land and give the international consortium the
right of way for the pipeline. This solution supplies unlimited
quantities of quality water; even the sewage created by using this water
will be of an improved quality that is more suitable for purification
and recycling for agriculture. In view of international involvement the
Palestinians will have no fear of Israel stopping the flow due to an
emergency situation, and no dependency on Israel. The cost will be about
50 cents per cubic meter, including delivery, on condition that the
international community builds the installations as grants, compared to
50-60 cents the Palestinians pay today to Israel's Mekorot company.

Q: What is delaying this solution for the northern West Bank?

A: If the Palestinians say yes, the Americans are prepared to
request the funds. With the Europeans it's more a matter of talk at this
point. But there is no agreement with the Palestinians because some of
them are still insisting on water rights from aquifers that in any case
are empty and becoming saline. In other words, some of the Palestinians
who deal with this issue are in the ideological phase, not the phase of
pragmatic solutions.

Q: Can this desalination solution help Jordan too?

A: Yes. We can enlarge the facility at Hadera and extend the
pipeline to Jordan.

Q: How do you relate to the proposal to import water from
Turkey?

A: Importing from Turkey is still problematic because the use of
oil tankers for transporting drinking water still has to be tested. If
the experiments of a certain Israeli company succeed in producing
alternative means of importing drinking water via the sea, we'll have
another option. Water from Turkey for Jordan and the Palestinians will
cost some 30 cents per cubic meter, less than the cost of desalinated
water (without capital return). Perhaps for a period of time the Turks
won't charge the Palestinians and Jordanians for the water, as aid to
fellow Muslim countries.

Q: Can sewage recycling be solved the way water issues are
dealt with?

A: Sewage purification and recycling and prevention of
contamination of water supplies are no less important than water supply
itself. The problems involved in operating sewage recycling plants are
greater than managing water systems. So the international community will
not only have to build these plants for the Palestinians as grants, but
subsidize operations as well for several decades. We in Israel are most
interested in sewage purification in the West Bank because of the flow
down from there into our water sources. But recycling in Gaza is no less
important.

Q: Finally, in view of the Intifada, what is the current
status of cooperation on water issues between Israel and the Palestinians?

A: The cooperation framework set up between the two sides is a
good one. It is holding firm even under fire. The commitment each side
gave the other, to help one another even under difficult conditions is,
in general, working. There are repairs, there is instruction, spare
parts are delivered and water is distributed--all in the spirit of good
will prevailing since the interim agreements.

