Q: How can international involvement or a conference help the
situation now?

A: I think that neither side is ready to come to a resolution or to
compromise now--in particular the Israeli side. The Israelis don't have
any real intentions of entering into a political solution. If they do go
for that, it will be an agreement for forty percent of the West Bank and
to postpone the real issues. This offer will not attract anyone on the
Palestinian side.

In order to be successful, an international conference should have a
clear basis with the clear terms of reference of [United Nations
Resolutions] 242 and 338 and also, not address how to "explain" these
international references, but how to implement them. These resolutions
have already been compromised.

Q: When are the conditions ripe for international involvement?

A: When both sides are tired. They are tired now. The Palestinians
are always asking for international intervention, which means they are
feeling the negative effects. The Israelis know they cannot win--even if
they conquer all of the West Bank, this military achievement will not be
a political one. The Palestinians also realize that the Israelis can
defeat them militarily, but not politically.

In these circumstances there should be a third party to pressure the
Israelis towards international legality. But as long as the United
States is that party, it will intervene one way or another on the side
of Israel. Also, there is another obstacle, which is that after
September 11, the Americans are looking to fight terrorism and have put
Iraq on the agenda. [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon prefers that,
when the American attack on Iraq happens, it be without [Palestinian
leader Yasser] Arafat. But the US is afraid of the consequences of
getting rid of Arafat. This can be seen in their double position. They
don't know how to deal with him. The Arab states are trying to tell them
that you should go with Arafat and that if you do not, this will be a
destabilizing factor.

Q: The United States administration is making some statements
now addressing the Palestinian occupation, chastising the Israelis. They
seem to be making an effort to appear balanced. What kind of approach
would convince you that their international intervention might work?

A: I think that there should be promises, real ones, with
guarantees and a down payment. This might happen: a withdrawal of the
Israeli army and the lifting of the siege. But the Israelis also want a
down payment. Yesterday, Sharon was saying that they will not let
Palestinians blackmail them. This means that this is tit-for-tat: if we
keep up our military operations, they will keep up their attacks.

Q: For some time, Arafat has shown himself a true believer in
the caveat that only the United States can deliver Palestinian freedom.
Do you think that his thoughts on this have changed at all lately?

A: No, of course not. He is not the only one to believe this. The
United States is the only party who can do anything.

Q: Well, perhaps he might change to focus on making changes
inside Israeli society, for example...

A: I believe in this approach, but it will take ten years. [For
Arafat], this is not the time for this. There is mistrust. Personally, I
can say that I have always had contacts with Israelis from Peace Now,
for example, but it is really hard now. I just feel that if they don't
condemn what is going on in the Palestinian territories that there is no
basis for anything. In the past, there was, but now something is broken.

I do think that Palestinians should address Israeli public opinion in
another way. The suicide attacks in Israel have destroyed all the
bridges between us and allowed the Israeli right wing to say that this
is not a conflict against occupation, but against Israel itself. The
settlers are now saying, "The settlements are not the issue, look at
what they are doing in Jerusalem, in Tel Aviv."

Q: Do you think that more Palestinians are saying this?

A: No, this is not a popular viewpoint among Palestinians. I just
want to know why it is that the Iranian Prime Minister goes to Hezballah
and asks him to stop attacks on Israel, so as not to give Sharon an
excuse to attack, but here it is not all right to ask Hamas to do the
same thing. It indicates that there is a political agenda from outside.
While it is true that those who are doing these attacks are sacrificing
themselves for the Palestinian cause and the Islamic cause, the
Palestinian people themselves should not commit collective
suicide.

