Recent weeks have witnessed a bewildering wave of initiatives to
introduce international mechanisms and solutions into the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, from the Arab League-endorsed Saudi
initiative, via an international mandate on the West Bank and Gaza
(proposed by former United States ambassador to Israel Martin Indyk), to
the initiative ascribed to US President George W. Bush and Saudi Crown
Prince Abdallah to "divide up" the task of pressuring Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. Two
international initiatives have actually been launched: the dispatch of
American-British jailers to Jericho, whose arrival brought about the
conclusion of the Israeli siege on Arafat's headquarters in Ramallah;
and the United Nations' abortive Jenin fact-finding commission.

By early May the leading initiative appeared to be that of US Secretary
of State Colin Powell to convene an international conference in Turkey
in June. This reflected close American coordination with Saudi Arabia
and with the other prospective non-regional participants: the European
Union, Russia and the UN.

Internationalization has thus become the dominant theme in Israeli-Arab
conflict resolution. It reflects the obvious inability of the
belligerent parties to deal with the conflict on their own. Accordingly,
this escalation of the search for a solution to the international level
must be seen as a welcome development. But it is also fraught with
dangers: the collapse of an international conference is liable to have
the same domino effect as the failure of Camp David II in July 2000.
Hence the need to examine the Israeli and Palestinian positions, the
pitfalls, and the tasks that face the conference organizers in the
coming weeks.

The Sharon government can claim to have taken the initiative to convene
a "regional" conference of fairly similar proportions. This appears to
have been one of Sharon's tactics for rebuffing US and UN pressure
during the recent military campaign. Sharon also hopes that the presence
of Saudi, Egyptian and Jordanian leaders will enable him to bypass
Arafat and discuss the Palestinian issue in terms closer to his own.
This perception is based on messages passed on to him in recent weeks
from Arab leaders who are highly critical of Arafat's leadership.

The conference idea may also enable Sharon to play for time politically
while the Israeli-Palestinian situation stabilizes under international
and regional pressure, until the anticipated US offensive against Iraq
reshuffles the Middle East cards. On the other hand, if the situation
does not stabilize and Palestinian suicide bombings are renewed, Sharon
will again have a pretext for freezing peace talks and invoking military
measures. But note that Palestinian success in focusing world attention
on Israel's actions in Jenin will mitigate against any far-reaching new
Israel Defense Forces offensive, say, against the refugee camps in Gaza.

One specific issue that the parties will have to address in the coming
weeks concerns an invitation to Syria (and, by extension, Lebanon) to
join the conference. The Saudi initiative would appear to mandate such
an invitation. Would Sharon welcome the prospect of an Israeli
negotiating track with Syria at Palestinian expense? Conceivably. But
would Arafat? Indeed, are any of the relevant leaders interested in
bringing Bashar al-Asad into the process, in view of the Syrian
president's apparent acute failure to "grow into" his job?

Sharon must also decide whether he wants the conference to be held at
the most senior leadership echelon, where he would have to face off with
the "irrelevant" Arafat, or at the level of foreign ministers, where
Shimon Peres might take maverick initiatives behind his back. And how
will the Israeli prime minister deal with hawkish pressures within his
own party, which now threatens to reject the very idea of a two-state
solution?

Arafat, for his part, has always sought "international legitimization"
for the Palestinian cause, and specifically international backing for UN
resolutions regarding refugee and territorial issues as he interprets
them. Generally speaking he can count on Arab, UN and EU support. But
will he adopt realistic positions that might sway the US? And can he
ensure a tranquil atmosphere back home? Indeed, in view of his recent
record (e.g., encouraging terrorism precisely when US envoys arrive in
the region), is he even interested in doing so?

Given that neither Sharon nor Arafat has embraced realistic peace
proposals, one challenge for the conference initiator, the US, is to
organize effective pressure on both sides to moderate their positions. A
more immediate task is to ensure a stable ceasefire and recruit broad
agreement regarding a conference agenda, the identity of the
participants and the level of representation--without which the
conference is a non-starter.

Ostensibly, the US international conference initiative reflects a
much-needed undertaking by the Bush administration to deal aggressively
with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In fact, it is not yet clear that
this is the case. The president's own commitment is not certain. A
clearly enunciated blessing from the Pentagon or from Congress for the
new approach has not been heard. Mid-term election considerations may
generate constraints on Bush's willingness to back Powell when, in the
crunch, it becomes necessary to pressure Sharon.

International process, American process--or no process? The coming weeks
will tell.

