Q: What in your view is the strategic significance of the
road map in its latest version?

Shoval: For several reasons, I'm not certain to what extent the new
version, or its predecessor or its successor will be relevant for the
process. First, I assume the American approach will undergo certain
changes after the campaign in Iraq. The Bush administration has already
stated that the road to Jerusalem leads through Baghdad. Secondly, a lot
depends on the elections in Israel. It's not only that "all politics is
local," but in concrete terms, if [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon
establishes a rightist government or one with Labor, there will be
different ramifications on the Israeli approach to the map.

At another level, the title of the road map hasn't changed from version
to version ["Road Map to a Permanent Two-State Solution"], but there
remain many question marks as to whether the final objective, two
states, will indeed constitute a permanent solution. We're discussing
"an independent, democratic, and viable Palestinian state living side by
side in peace and security with Israel," but what guarantee does the
world have that somehow it will be different from every other state in
the Arab world, when even according to Secretary of State Powell there
is no such state in the region? I assess that these issues will come up
for discussion, but after the campaign in Iraq. In any event, no plan
will be viable without the agreement of the State of Israel.

Q: Perhaps the Americans are not really serious about it...

Shoval: The Americans definitely would like, if not an ideal peace, then
at least to contain the ferocity of the conflict, if only for the sake
of coalition-building. But the preeminent geopolitical approach in this
administration holds that the Palestinian conflict is not the principal
cause of instability in the Middle East, and this view only became
stronger after the events of 9/11.

Q: What aspects of the new road map appear particularly
problematic?

Shoval: First of all, the emphases on fixed timetables, and the fact
that many of the two sides' obligations are scheduled simultaneously.
True, the title presents the road map as "performance-based," but the
performance tests are not strong enough, and the "not later than"
stipulations are troublesome. For example, it is not desirable that the
passage from phase I to phase II be determined by the Quartet. Secondly,
the plan ignores the refugee issue, which constituted the primary reason
for the failure of Camp David/Taba. While we are not here dealing with
final status issues, it should nevertheless be stated explicitly that
the problem will be solved by settling the refugees in the Arab world.

The stipulation that phase II will produce a Palestinian state "with
provisional borders and attributes of sovereignty" constitutes a step
backwards compared to President Bush's call on June 24, 2002 for a
"provisional state." The freezing of natural growth of settlements at
such an early stage is also problematic; for how long? Suppose the
process takes time and is even frozen. Thus there should be
conditionality attached to the freeze.

Q: By the way, how do you understand the call in phase II,
the phase of a state with provisional borders, for the "implementation
of prior agreements, to enhance maximum territorial contiguity,
including further action on settlements"?

Shoval: They mean the removal of settlements that impede contiguity.

Q: Additional positive or negative points in the plan?

Shoval: On the positive side, no doubt there is an improvement in the
security demands presented to the Palestinians. But our withdrawal to
the September 28 lines should be conditioned explicitly on an end to
violence. I also wonder if it's wise to offer "international recognition
of Palestinian state, including possible UN membership" as early as
phase II. Finally, there is no specific demand for the removal of
Arafat; this reflects the UN and EU approach and not the American
approach, and is unfortunate.

Q: The road map contains a commitment to "end the occupation
that began in 1967." How do you interpret this?

Shoval: Unfortunately President Bush also used this expression in his
June 24 speech. Israel, including the Labor Party, does not see the end
of the conflict in these terms, and does not interpret UNSC Resolution
242 as meaning a return to the Green Line. I'm not happy with this. It's
a "slippery slope." But in the final analysis even a national government
of the center and right will have to deal with the settlements on the
basis of our priorities. Even a modus vivendi arrangement with the other
side, not peace, would justify this.

Q: Why in your opinion is the Palestine Liberation
Organization not mentioned in this document as the partner for future
agreements with Israel? After all, the Oslo agreements were signed with
the PLO and not with the Palestinian Authority.

Shoval: This is confirmation that Oslo is dead.

