The prisoner issue offers one of the most telling manifestations of the
unequal power relationship between Israel and Palestine. Israel has
thousands of Palestinian prisoners; neither the Palestinian Authority
nor any other Palestinian organization holds Israeli prisoners. Thus the
question of release of prisoners is entirely up to the Israeli
authorities, unless a state or organization friendly to the Palestinian
cause is able to trade its few Israeli prisoners, or even the remains of
dead Israelis, for Palestinian prisoners.

Palestinian prisoners in Israeli hands are an asset whose value is
frequently misunderstood or mismanaged by Israel's government. On the
one hand, in the course of recent decades we have on several occasions
released hundreds and even thousands of Palestinian (and a few other
Arab) prisoners in order to redeem a handful of Israelis. Recently we
even paid such a price to Hizballah in Lebanon in exchange for a
criminal, Elhanan Tanenbaum. At the human level, both we and our Arab
partner in the exchange seem to be acknowledging that a single Israeli,
or even the body of a dead Israeli, is worth hundreds of Arabs--a source
of pride perhaps for some Israelis, but also a problematic and demeaning
ratio that only encourages our enemies to kidnap or otherwise capture
additional Israelis.

On the other hand, when the opportunity arises to release prisoners in
order to buy the good will and improve the domestic leadership image of
a positive Palestinian leader like former prime minister Mahmoud Abbas
(Abu Mazen) during his tenure about a year ago, our leadership demurs.
Suddenly, prisoners who have served half their sentences--in some cases
draconian sentences that have no parallel in the conduct of Israeli
civil courts toward Israeli criminals--are too valuable to "sacrifice"
for the sake of generating a chance for peace and security. One dynamic
that understandably toughens Israel's hand regarding prisoner release is
the treatment of Israelis in Arab jails: Tanenbaum in Lebanon and Azam
Azam in Egypt, for example. The same prisoners not released to Abbas
were traded a few months later for Tanenbaum. Yet this was a tragic
wasted opportunity on the part of the Sharon government; it reinforced
the impression that Sharon is not interested in a genuine peace process,
even when a genuine peace partner appears on the Palestinian side.

Turning to Palestinian calculations, the prisoner issue is of very high
national emotional significance. More than 600,000 Palestinians, meaning
a large proportion of Palestinian men in the prime of life, have gone
through Israeli jails since 1967. Many of Palestine's current security
and political leaders are among them. Prisoner issues are dealt with in
the PA at ministerial level. Some of the cruelest and most unrepentant
terrorists in our jails are Palestinian heroes, yet other "graduates" of
our jails are today among the most moderate and pragmatic Palestinian
leaders. Despite the overwhelming importance of this issue for
Palestinian society, its leadership appears little inclined to offer
Israel substantive concessions in return for the release of prisoners.

So our jails remain full of thousands of prisoners until, periodically,
things boil over into a hunger strike or some other manifestation of
prisoner frustration. No matter what justified punishment Israel metes
out to Palestinian terrorists--there is no death penalty--at the
societal level it appears to have little if any deterrent effect. The
Palestinian standard of judging the legitimacy of terrorist acts against
our civilians will never approximate ours.

Yet at the end of the day, we have to find a way to live together. Hence
we can only gain by releasing hundreds of prisoners as a gesture if and
when another leader like Abu Mazen comes along. And we have little to
lose by committing Israel to the incentive of a comprehensive prisoner
release--yes, even including those with "blood on their hands"--if and
when the Palestinian leadership accepts and enforces a genuine peace.
After all, despite the high moral standards of warfare we profess to
maintain, in Palestinian eyes we Israelis too have blood on our hands.

