Q: What are your comments on the revised road map document?

A: The document that I have seen, in my opinion, speaks
generally. There is no specificity on many issues and that leads the way
open before Israel not to be tied down to what I think is important for
realizing the needed peace.

Q: Does that mean, then, that you do not trust Israel?

A: Israel has not abandoned any of its claims voiced at the
first Zionist Congress until this moment. If I am mistaken, correct me.
Where has Israel in any way tempered or abandoned any of its claims from
long ago? As far as I am concerned, all that has happened is consistent
with those Israeli claims. All of our readiness to accommodate in one
way or another has not tempered Israel from continuing on its path.

For instance, Israel is engaging in settlement activity that started in
1967 and was condemned by numerous UN resolutions, to no avail. Israel
has riddled the occupied territories with settlements, and now they
represent facts on the ground that Israel is not ready to concede. We
are really in a difficult situation.

Q: In your view then, the way to peace is for Israel to
actively denounce those claims?

A: Our declared position--that we accept a state within the
borders of 1967 with all that is needed for a real and sovereign
Palestinian state--is a big concession on our part. However, Israel
after its 1967 occupation took all efforts to frustrate realization of
that. What else can one say?

I think that our declared position is the minimum that we can accept.
Really, we are willing and we are sacrificing to reach the needed peace
and we are very sincere in this. I am very sorry that Israel has been
creating obstacles.

Q: You have previously been very critical of the Palestinian
Authority. Where do you think that the Palestinian national cause is
heading?

A: I am not satisfied at all with the performance of our
Authority. Mostly, we are carrying on an unorganized struggle and so we
are losing. I feel very sorry about the severe losses that we are
enduring. Certainly, [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon is exploiting
our situation of disarray to inflict unprecedented damage. I am also
critical of the democratic world that stands by and does not say
anything about what Sharon is doing to us.

Q: From your experience as a negotiator, do you think that
Palestinians can and should seek American support? Is it possible to go
it alone?

A: We need the support of everyone, not only the Americans.
Certainly it is difficult to go it alone, although I do believe that if
we are able to prevail on ourselves and organize properly, that would
probably cause Israel to depart from its present stand, which exploits
our lack of organization.

Q: If you are discouraged with the Palestinian struggle and
with current attempts to make peace, where then do you get your hope?

A: The matter is to organize properly, and I think that unless
we organize, we are doomed. I say that quite frankly. But once we start
to organize whatever little potential we have, that will be the cause
for Israel to depart from its aggressive stance.

Q: Then from your perspective, this road map isn't going
anywhere?

A: My guess is that this road map is not going to be accepted
by Sharon and that he will do everything to scuttle it, even if the
Palestinians accept it. I am sorry to make you feel that I am so
negative, but I speak sincerely when I say that I wish to see positive
signs from the Israeli side that they are really ready to concede to our
very modified position.

Now, in the face of what Israel has established on the ground, much talk
and thought is required over what is a viable thing for us Palestinians.
Do you really think that the Israeli leadership, in light of what has
been established on the ground, will agree to grant the Palestinians
something viable?

