The new version of the road map comprises many positive elements. But it
is not particularly useful.

Last October, when bitterlemons discussed the previous draft of the road
map (edition 39, Oct. 28, 2002), I noted that the primary positive
aspect of an otherwise futile document was its recognition that United
Nations Security Council Resolution 242 is not a sufficient basis for
Israeli-Palestinian peacemaking. By evoking Resolution 1397 (affirming
the goal of a Palestinian state) and the so-called Saudi initiative that
offers "Arab state acceptance of normal relations with Israel and
security for all the states of the region," the road map added important
building blocks for future peace efforts.

This perception has since been reinforced in conversations with senior
Arab policymakers, who explained that the importance of the road map in
their eyes rests in its institutionalization of two key provisions that
are missing from 242 and that were inserted into the international
consensus by United States President Bush's speech of June 24, 2002: the
creation of a Palestinian state, and a timetable for its creation.

The latest draft of the road map, issued in December 2002 at the
Quartet's meeting in Washington, maintains this key achievement. It's
also an easier read: what began as an outline has been turned into a
narrative, and some silly timetable mistakes have been rectified.
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon can take satisfaction from the more
detailed presentation of Israel's justified security requirements in
phase I and from the less justified dilution of the Quartet's
supervisory or monitoring role. Palestinians can point to tougher
demands on settlements and a description of a Palestinian state, stated
not once but twice, that "ends the occupation that began in 1967," and
note with satisfaction that the removal of Yasir Arafat from his
leadership position is still not explicitly called for.

But this is not a viable prescription for a workable peace process.
Rather, it is a stew, a goulash, into which each member of the Quartet,
followed by Israel and the Palestinians, has been encouraged to toss its
favorite food. Of course, some of these components, as noted above, are
helpful and important. But upon reading and rereading the latest road
map, one cannot escape the impression that somewhere in the White House
someone is smirking over this culinary creation. It is positive enough
not to be rejected outright by any party, flawed enough to require yet
further discussion and improvement, tempting enough to keep the
Europeans and Arabs interested and engaged until after the next Gulf
War, and over and above all else: essentially irrelevant to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, which doesn't really interest the
administration anyway.

Irrelevant, because it reflects a reality in which none of the three key
players--Bush, Sharon and Arafat--has a workable strategy for peace.
Irrelevant, because after Israel's elections and after the next Gulf War
so many strategic conditions will have changed that we'll have to start
all over again anyway. Irrelevant, because Israeli and Palestinian
leaders who are truly interested in negotiating and are credible in one
another's eyes don't need this convoluted agenda of phases, quasi-states
and international conferences. And irrelevant, because in the absence of
such leaders the only workable contributions to peacemaking, however
incomplete and unsatisfying, are unilateral moves by both sides.

The Labor Party's support for unilateral Israeli withdrawal and
dismantling of settlements, and the current Egyptian effort to broker a
unilateral Palestinian ceasefire, are more relevant than the road map.
True, neither initiative looks likely to succeed in the near future. But
neither does the road map. And the unilateral ideas are more logical,
more feasible and in some ways more sincere than the road map.

If the Quartet is serious it will set aside the road map and get behind
the more realistic unilateral initiatives.

