This would appear to be an appropriate time to discuss the potential for
Palestinian nonviolence and its ramifications for Israel. First, because
there is a growing number of people and groups in Palestine that believe
in nonviolent struggle against Israel. Secondly, because in a few
instances in the central West Bank in recent months nonviolent
demonstrations proved effective in drawing the attention of the media
and the courts to the injustices of Israel's security fence as
originally located at the local, village level.

Thirdly, the emergence of Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) as leader of the PLO
and leading candidate for the Palestinian Authority presidency points to
the relevancy of nonviolent tactics of resistance. Abu Mazen
unequivocally denounces Palestinian violence as a counterproductive
approach; by default, the only appropriate form of resistance in his
eyes would be nonviolence (coupled with a diplomatic campaign for a
peace process congenial to Palestinian terms). Indeed, if Abu Mazen's
current efforts bear fruit and Palestinians agree to a comprehensive
ceasefire, the nonviolent approach may come to the fore as a means of
protest or resistance.

The most famous, and successful, nonviolent campaign in modern history
was led by Mahatma Gandhi in India against the British, and culminated
in Indian independence in 1947. It is generally understood that the
campaign succeeded because, at the end of the day, the British were a
civilized occupier that could not for long stomach shooting at point
blank range at masses of nonviolent Indian demonstrators, and because
Gandhi employed effective forms of economic boycott, and got global
publicity.

Are we Israelis a "civilized" occupier? Despite all the casualties we
have inflicted in four years on Palestinian civilians and their
property--yes. We are no worse than any other occupier. But the
difference between Israel in the West Bank and Gaza and the British in
India is that even those of us who oppose the settlements and seek to
end the occupation, strongly believe that we are defending our homes and
our families, which have been under intense and brutal attack, rather
than some distant "jewel in the crown" of an empire.

A veteran Israeli general once related to me how, in 1949, leaders of
the Palestinian refugee population, freshly arrived in Gaza, threatened
to launch a "green march" north up the Mediterranean coast to homes they
had abandoned in Ashdod and Jaffa. The general's response was to
threaten to open fire on the marchers, and the march was cancelled.
Today the response would feature tear gas and rubber bullets, but the
principle would be the same: if the purpose of Palestinian nonviolent
tactics were to endanger Israel and Israelis and rekindle a conflict, it
would undoubtedly be opposed by all available non-lethal means.

On the other hand, it is possible to perceive a nonviolent strategy that
could potentially be successful for Palestinians. Its point of departure
would be the premise that, as the weaker actor, the Palestinians need to
find a more effective tactic of mass resistance than force. The purpose
would be to draw Israeli and international attention to Israeli
injustices, such as the settlements and bypass roads and the roadblocks
they engender. The protest would be confined to the territories, and no
Israeli lives or property would be threatened. The backdrop would be a
total absence of violent attacks against Israelis by organized
Palestinian groups like Hamas and the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades, as well as
of stone throwing and Molotov cocktail attacks, which are potentially
lethal. And the media would have to be heavily involved in covering the
protest.

If all these conditions were met, a Palestinian nonviolent campaign
could be effective, particularly if Abu Mazen gets a popular mandate for
his rule. Yet this does not appear to be an easy option for Palestinian
society under current social and political conditions.

