The prisoners' issue has always been an explosive one in
Palestinian-Israeli relations. Israel--the Israeli occupation and the
policies and practices arising from it--has always relied heavily on
putting large numbers of Palestinians in Israeli jails. I remember at
the time of my own four-year stint in the 1970s, the number of
Palestinian prisoners was 18,000.

Given the circulation of prisoners who do not serve long sentences, the
situation in the Palestinian territories has reached a point now where
it is difficult to find a single family where at least one of its
members either is not or has not been in prison. In my case, I am one of
four brothers of whom all have experienced prison time at one point or
another.

Because imprisonment is such a widespread phenomenon, it has started to
generate its own culture and this culture influences the political
culture in society in general. Even prison terminology has become part
of the Palestinian public discourse.

When we talk about prisoners, we are talking about the huge number of
people, either in prison now or in the past, who were active in the
struggle against the occupation or at least were suspected by the
Israelis of being involved. As such, this is a very respected sector of
society that has become, in its own right, a credible and influential
community. Most of those who occupied significant positions within the
bureaucracy of the Palestinian Authority when it was established were
and still are from among this community. This is also correct for the
security apparatuses.

Throughout the occupation, the prisoners' strikes have thus strongly
influenced the Palestinian street. There have been several upheavals
that, within a few weeks to a few months spread all over the territories
in the course of prisoner solidarity campaigns.

Part of this deeply felt empathy is that the public at large identifies
strongly with the objectives and activities of the prisoners. There is a
feeling among the public that the prisoners in a way are serving their
sentences on behalf of all society. In addition, the horrible stories of
torture that people hear from prisoners themselves and from prisoners'
relatives, increases this tendency and the desire to show solidarity.

The stories released from Abu Ghreib prison in Iraq, once they caught
the world's attention, reminded many Palestinian of their own personal
experiences or stories that were heard from relatives and friends,
experiences that go much beyond the stories that were published out of
Abu Ghreib. Unfortunately, in our case the issue garnered much less
international media attention.

The latest hunger strike, which was recently suspended pending
negotiations with the occupying forces, was the latest example of the
genuine feelings of sympathy and solidarity that the Palestinian public
holds toward the prisoners. This was evidenced by the demonstrations and
sit-in strikes in every town or city in the Palestinian territories
without exception. I would go even further and say that this wave of
popular solidarity removed a great deal of the poisoned internal
atmosphere between different political tendencies that led to so much
recent tension, especially in Gaza. The strike created instead a feeling
of solidarity with the cause of the prisoners that unified the
Palestinian public, and the strike's ultimate slogan--no peace without
the release of all Palestinian prisoners--was a greater unifying factor
than any other recent call.

