Q: Some Palestinians talk of mounting a nonviolent
intifada. Do you believe Palestinian society is capable of this? 

Rothschild: I'm not sure I know what "nonviolent intifada" means. If
this means no shooting, no stone throwing, no violent acts at all, this
is one thing. If it means no shooting, but stones and Molotov cocktails
are allowed, this is a different issue. 

Q: Let's begin with the first case: no violent acts at all. /

Rothschild: I'm not sure they can. As I see Palestinian society at
the moment it is too divided and diverse. Part of what has happened in
the last four years happened because we disarmed their entire law and
order structure, and part happened because Yasser Arafat did not want
such a structure. In the absence of a law and order structure those who
took the lead are those who traditionally committed criminal acts, not
terrorist acts, and they have gained a lot of power, money and respect
in their regions and I'm not sure they're going to give them up. Are
they capable of launching a sort of nonviolent intifada? I doubt it. 

Q: And the second, more limited use of nonviolence. /

Rothschild: As far as we are concerned it makes no difference. A
stone can kill and so can a Molotov cocktail, just as shooting can. Of
course there's a difference in the way you react, but it doesn't matter
for the sake of this discussion. 

Q: How would the IDF react to genuine and comprehensive
non-violence? 

Rothschild: It depends how widespread the phenomenon is. If an entire
region is launching non-violent demonstrations I don't think the IDF
should interfere--up to the moment when it endangers Israeli life and
property. Then it will have to react in a non-lethal, non-violent way.
But up to that moment it shouldn't do anything. 

Q: The Bet Sahour tax strike during the first intifada was
seen by many as an attempt to invoke nonviolent means. This happened on
your "watch". 

Rothschild: Yes, that was in my time. The situation has changed
since. A tax strike at that time was a strike against us. Today a
Palestinian tax strike or even an education strike will be against
themselves. The moment the Palestinian Authority took responsibility
over all civilian spheres of life, this kind of nonviolent strike became
worth very little. 

[In its day] it also achieved very little, which is why it didn't
spread. The strike was counterproductive. At the end of the day people
need services from the responsible authority. They paid no taxes and got
no services. We didn't pay salaries to teachers and health services,
didn't deal with garbage and sewage, and in no time they understood that
that was not the way to deal with our rule. 

Q: Do you recall additional instances of Palestinian
nonviolent struggle initiatives? 

Rothschild: In 1988, Arafat initiated the peace march from all the
refugee camps in the south of Lebanon to Israel. The Lebanese stopped
them because they understood it would become hellish. Arafat wanted to
do the same from Jordan and from Egypt, but the authorities there
declared a military zone. I was head of IDF intelligence analysis at the
time and we dealt with this threat quite a bit. Our solution was that as
long as they do not endanger Israeli life and property we won't take
action. But we would have prevented them from coming. 

Q: Suppose, for example, that a large mass of Palestinians
from the West Bank tried to march to the Temple MountHaram al-Sharif in
Jerusalem. 

Rothschild: At Feisal Husseini's funeral a year or two ago we allowed
a large mass of Palestinians to enter Jerusalem. Since then we have used
tear gas and other non-lethal weapons to prevent this. New non-lethal
weapons may soon be introduced. The use of weapons is escalative. The
moment they endanger property or lives we'll open fire.

