There have been several calls over the past few years to end the armed
Palestinian resistance in favor of a nonviolent approach. But, as with
so many aspects of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, nonviolence only
stands a chance if respected by the other side.

Israeli propaganda has been very successful in some circles,
particularly in the United States, at portraying armed Palestinian
activity as acts of terrorism that are illegitimate and must be stopped
at any cost. Consequently, these circles have come to accept the Israeli
version that Israeli violence is simply a legitimate response to defend
Israelis against Palestinian violence.

Needless to say, there is a great deal of mixing cause and effect in
this version of reality since it completely ignores the fact that all
the violence is a direct result of the Israeli occupation. This
occupation, in fact, has been violent from the very outset and in
different ways. The appropriation of Palestinian land upon which, in the
early years of the occupation, Palestinians relied for the bulk of their
livelihoods, was a form of violence and was backed up by force. Ditto
the establishment of settlements and the illegal introduction of Jewish
civilians on land and using resources belonging to the Palestinian
people. The persistent and ever expanding measures to these ends pursued
by successive Israeli governments, unhindered by any outside pressures,
led many to draw the conclusion that the occupation was the expression
of an ultimate violent process that must inevitably invite a violent
reaction.

Add to this decades-old land grab the Israeli policies of
assassinations, mass arrests, house demolitions and closures, and it's
no surprise that the internal Palestinian debate and balance of power
has swung in favor of those that advocate violence as the only means of
getting rid of the occupation.

Violence from either side, however, only serves to reinforce and harden
attitudes. On the Palestinian side, some analysts have argued that not
only does Palestinian violence invite ever more extreme Israeli
measures, it only serves the interests of the right wing extremists
currently in power in Israel. Indeed, this Israeli government has never
given the Palestinian peace camp pause to prove to people that the
absence of violence could be the best way to achieve Palestinian
aspirations.

The best example of this, of course, was during Mahmoud Abbas' short
tenure as prime minister last year, when Mohammad Dahlan served as
minister for public security. That government, which successfully forged
a commitment from the Palestinian factions to enter into a ceasefire,
was actively and intentionally undermined by Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon who, by continuing his assassinations policy, soon saw to
it that Abu Mazen's efforts came to nothing.

Now efforts are underway to repeat the experiment. In spite of the full
agreement as regards the political and negotiating positions between the
late President Yasser Arafat and Abu Mazen, it's no secret that there
were differences between the two on what approach would be the more
effective. Abu Mazen seems to be taking another stab at a political
approach and is trying to prepare the ground. This confronts us with two
possible scenarios.

A ceasefire could be encouraged by Israel, if it felt that the
international community and especially Washington was prepared to
pressure and even isolate it, should it fail to do so. Abu Mazen's
success in this endeavor stands and falls with Israel's readiness to
cease its own acts of violence in all its forms. The assassinations and
house demolitions are but the most obvious measures that must end at
once. A wall is being built upon Palestinian land and its construction
must stop. Settlement expansions must cease.

If Israel fails to reciprocate, and there is insufficient international
pressure to force it to do so, history will repeat itself, and the
Palestinian people will draw the conclusion that a nonviolent,
negotiated and legal tactic has little chance of success. This could
bring us another round of vicious and violent confrontations even
fiercer than anything we have witnessed so far.

The international community's role is essential in all this, because the
natural posture of this Israeli government is negative and only with
sufficient international pressure might this posture be arrested.

