Q: We hear the strike is suspended. Is it temporary,
pending negotiations, or is the strike finished? Might it start again?

A: We have received information that the prisoners halted
their strike because they reached certain understandings with the
Israeli authorities. None of us want a return to the hunger strike and
we would never wish for this. However, if they do not receive any
response to their demands for simple every day basic necessities and if
conditions in the prisons are not returned to what they were a year and
a half ago, then the situation will become very difficult and nobody
will be able to prevent the prisoners from resisting in order to improve
their living conditions.

Q: Prisoners say some of their demands have been met, while
the Israelis deny this. What is the score? What demands have been met,
and why are the Israelis denying this?

A: This is all part of the negotiations between the
prisoners and the prison authorities. We are here to give them support
but we were never part of the negotiations. To know exactly what went on
[in the negotiations] will take some time, and therefore it will be a
while before we know what demands were met and what are the issues still
pending. We have to wait before we judge anything and give it time.
Until now, we don't have any details. Anyway, an issue like this cannot
come to an end overnight--it needs time, so we must be patient and see
what their negotiations brought about. As far as we know, the
negotiations are still ongoing.

Q: How effective do you feel the strike was?

A: Strikes are one of the legal avenues for prisoners and
the strike is one form of revolutionary resistance. This means that
anyone who supports freedom in the world should stand by them and anyone
with a conscience should give them support because this is a very
civilized way of rebellion. Because strikes are legal, peaceful and
civilized, they have always given positive results.

Q: Both Palestinian officials and the Palestinian public
have in word or deed shown solidarity with the prisoners. How effective
do you feel the strike was in this regard?

A: Of course there was support from them because the
prisoners are their people--they are their sons, their brothers, their
sisters, their colleagues--who are fighting in their own way. So the
people no doubt will stand behind them. This is the least the people can
do for the prisoners.

So, one success of the strike is that it reactivated the Palestinian
street all over the homeland, and all the sectors participated to show
their support.

Q: Some prisoners would have been on hunger strike for over
two weeks. How is their health?

A: The prisoners who were on hunger strike for this period
were undergoing very difficult health conditions. However, now, four
days after the strike was called off, their health is gradually
returning to normal.

Q: In general, what impact do the prisoners and their
activities have on Palestinian society?

A: At present there are 7,500 Palestinian prisoners in
Israeli jails. Of these 450 are children and 1,700 are administrative
detainees. The remainder has been sentenced or is awaiting sentencing.
The prisoners represent the conscience of the people, and people's
support is what gives prisoners their strength and determination.

