I was astounded by the subject of this issue of bitterlemons, i.e. the
role of intellectuals in the peace process. My gut reaction was to
decline and abstain from writing the essay. In fact, the topic is filled
with hypothetical assumptions, which I believe cannot be used as valid
bases for exploring the subject. It is impossible to attain a procedural
definition of this issue and discuss it according to specific criteria.

However, once I thought the matter through, I decided to wonder about
the issue, rather than discuss it. The reason I accepted after my
initial hesitation was the need to explore the concept that a specific
role for intellectuals actually exists, not only in the political
process, but also in other areas. Do intellectuals have a specific,
predefined function that they should be aware of and act out as one
solid bloc?

If the hidden pretension underlying my question is "yes"--i.e. that such
a role actually exists--this undoubtedly leads us to a series of
questions that must be answered clearly, in order to be able to define
the subject: Who is the intellectual? What makes he or she one? Should
the intellectual define him or herself or be defined as such? Do
intellectuals form a specific, clearly defined and integral social
category? Do they need to have unified principles, visions and modus
operandi? Do they need to have their own positions, independent from
those of their societies?

I am of the mind that the term "intellectual" is a vague concept,
although it might include some common general characteristics. /My/
"intellectual" may not be considered as such by someone else, because
the matter is purely subjective. The definition is beholden more to
personal evaluation than to objective standardization. (Is everyone
holding a university degree considered an intellectual?) Intellectuals
do not constitute a special social category. They are an integral part
of the social fabric. Some of them come from underprivileged classes
while others are clearly upper-class. Some are secular, others deeply
religious. Some are right-wingers, others leftists. Some are
progressives, others conservative. Some are rural, still others
city-dwellers, and so on. Hence, intellectuals do not share unified
principles, visions and modus operandi. Neither they, nor their beliefs,
may be squeezed together, and pointed in one singular direction. On the
contrary, because they are an integral part of the social fabric, they
reflect a wide variety of principles, visions, and tendencies.

Indeed, because they are intellectuals, their trademark is one of
conflicting positions. Consequently, there is no such thing as a
singular "point on the compass" for the actions of intellectuals, and it
is impossible to issue a judgment on which trend is better than another.
Heterogeneity--and not homogeneity--being the basic factor affecting the
positions of those we call "intellectuals", the principle that rules
their differences is the multiplicity and variety of their interests.
Each intellectual, in his or her capacity as a member of society, has
interests that might correlate with, or work against, the interests of
others. Thus, achieving these interests is what guides the
"intellectual?s" course of action.

If the above is true, then there is no basis for this subject that I was
asked to write about--unless it is in someone?s interest to direct the
role of intellectuals in a given direction. This way, intellectuals
might be encouraged to adopt a so-called "positive role" in pushing the
peace process forward! If this is truly the motive, it reduces the
intellectuals? breadth of variety. It also introduces a value judgment
categorizing intellectuals as "those who are with" and "those who are
against." Intellectuals that believe in the process will be deemed "good
intellectuals." But those who have reservations about, or are expressly
opposed to the process will be labeled "bad intellectuals," if they are
lucky. In fact, they may be ousted from the intellectuals? list and--in
this world of "those who are not with us are against us"--squeezed onto
the list of agitators or even terrorists.

There are intellectuals whose interests lie with the political process,
who use their position in a variety of roles to support that process. By
doing so, they not only express their position, but that of all social
groups that see their own interests advanced by the political process.
On the other hand, there are also skeptics, or those who oppose the
process, and whose positions are consequently at odds with those parties
who disagree. In this way, intellectuals, be they pro- or
anti-settlement, do have a role to play.

But if we truly believe in democracy, it is the people?s choice that
must prevail. What we really need to know is who will convince the
majority of the righteousness of his or her position--not who will seek
to impose his or her beliefs on others.

