The Israeli-Palestinian peace process was always marred with
contradictions: mutual dependence with mutual rejection; a desire for
separation with an inertia of occupation; necessary compromise with
traditional dogmas. Today's most blatant paradox is that both Israeli
and Palestinian public opinion, fatigued by conflict, understanding that
nothing will be resolved by force, now accept far-reaching compromises
that were unimaginable when the Oslo process began.

Most Israelis would now accept a Palestinian state more or less within
the 1967 boundaries, even if that includes some compromise over
Jerusalem and a major withdrawal of settlements, if they knew that the
other side would finally end the conflict and if this would guarantee an
end to terror and violence. Most Palestinians would espouse peaceful
coexistence with Israel and eradicate terrorist organizations such as
the Hamas and the Jihad, if they thought Israel was honestly ready to
grant the Palestinians independence and end the occupation.

What keeps the conflict alive and dangerous are therefore not
fundamental positions of mainstream society, but an inherent suspicion
about the real intentions of the leadership of the other side.
Palestinians believe that peace for Israel is another means for the
continuation of occupation. For most Israelis, Palestinian peace means
only the continuation of conflict and the implementation of the right of
return.

Both sides have therefore finally come to the right conclusion about
their basic positions, yet are haunted by misguided suspicions about the
other side. This is exactly the point where the leadership needs to
create a bridge of trust. This is exactly the juncture where both
Palestinian leader Arafat and Israeli Prime Minister Sharon are missing
a tremendous, historic opportunity. Rather than demonizing the other
leader, they should begin a dialogue to create the needed trust, as
nothing will be solved by conflict and we will both deteriorate into a
situation of futile bloodshed.

Today there is a new opportunity. The Peres-Abu Ala understandings
create the necessary framework for a political process which is based on
the incremental eradication of terrorism and the establishment of a
Palestinian state, with ongoing negotiations on the permanent status
issues within a given time framework, supported by the international
community. If Sharon and Arafat (as well as the American interlocutors)
do not use these understandings as a platform to recreate dialogue
instead of solutions by force, they will neither reflect the needs of
their respective people, nor their fundamental desires.

This is how the people, as well as history, will ultimately judge them.
If both or either of them are guided by the easy track of populism and
demagoguery, a possible and necessary historical peace will be missed,
Israel will be defeated by its own occupation of Palestinian territory
and Palestine will be defeated by its own tolerance of fundamentalist
violence.

The "Peres-Abu Ala test" is related not only to how we will live
together side by side, but also to what our identities will be. The two
leaders and our American friends will have to answer these questions,
based on the existing concrete proposal, over the next few weeks, if not
days.

