Trust between Israelis and Palestinians has broken down completely
during the past 30 months of Intifada. Even before then, when peace
negotiations were at their height, the two parties agreed that the
nature of the problems and tensions to be dealt with by any final status
agreement warranted an international monitoring component of some sort:
for example, at Palestine's borders with the Arab world, in the Jordan
Valley, and in ensuring compliance with regard to a variety of
additional security issues.

Both Palestinians and Israelis understood even then that their peace
would not resemble the peace between Israel and Jordan, where no
international forces are involved, or even the Israeli-Egyptian peace,
where an American-led military force patrols a demilitarized and largely
empty desert that separates the armies of the two sides. Indeed, if only
there were a desert between Israelis and Palestinians, we would have far
fewer problems.

Thus, when the two sides do get back to peacemaking, or if the United
States begins to take the "roadmap
                                                " seriously after the
war in Iraq, then the current legacy of violence and the breakdown in
communications between the two sides will probably warrant the
introduction of international forces to an extent even greater than that
anticipated at Camp David in 2000 and Taba in 2001. Already, a variety
of internal and external actors are floating a wide spectrum of
proposals, from a CIA-led monitoring team for phase I of the roadmap to
a United Nations or Quartet nationbuilding trusteeship for the entire
West Bank and Gaza.

From the Israeli standpoint, some 55 years of problematic interaction
with UN and other international forces have taught us a number of
lessons that we would do well to apply when it comes to discussing the
upcoming international role.

First, an international element should be inserted only when both
belligerents concur with its mandate. The mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement Force (UNDOF) on the Golan Heights was agreed in 1974
between Israel and Syria, whereas the mandate of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) was agreed to by Lebanon alone; Israel
was not consulted. This is one key reason why UNDOF has been so much
more successful than UNIFIL.

Secondly, and ideally, the international element should be little more
than "icing on the cake", i.e., it should complement and reinforce the
will and desire of the two local parties to live at peace and honor
their agreements. This means that if at some point the international
element is removed, the peace does not necessarily collapse. The
Multinational Force and Observers (MFO) in Sinai is a successful example
of this principle at work. In contrast, when its predecessor, the United
Nations Emergency Force, was removed by then UN Secretary General U
Thant in May 1967 without consulting Israel, this helped precipitate the
Six-Day War.

Thirdly, the deployment of international forces in the Israel-Arab
context has had a greater chance of success when they genuinely
separated Israelis and Arabs. Here again, the MFO and UNDOF have worked
relatively well, whereas UNIFIL, which until 2000 found itself in the
thick of Israeli-Hizballah clashes in southern Lebanon, generally
failed. Moreover, Israel's unhappy experience with UNIFIL caused serious
tensions in Israel's relationship with otherwise friendly countries like
Holland and Norway that contributed troops to the force.

Fourth, judging at least by the lone instance of a non-UN force, the
MFO, Israel has a better chance of maintaining a positive relationship
with an American-led, non-UN force than with a UN force, whose
leadership and management inevitably reflect the huge anti-Israel bias
incorporated into most UN institutions.

If we apply these lessons to the prospects for an international role in
an Israeli-Palestinian peace process, the following rules of thumb emerge:

    * The international role and the force's detailed mandate should be
      agreed between the two sides. Given the current lack of trust and
      poor communications between them, this is impossible today. Some
      would argue that this state of affairs reinforces the need for
      third party intervention. One increasingly mentioned option in
      this regard is an international nationbuilding force similar to
      those that have been deployed in recent years in Bosnia and East
      Timor. From Israel's standpoint this is not a good idea, insofar
      as the force might frequently take the side of the Palestinian
      "underdog" in bilateral disputes, and would seek to bar Israel
      from initiating armed action against Palestinian terrorists on the
      Palestinian territory it patrols. The Israeli-Palestinian reality
      has in any case not deteriorated to a state of anarchy similar to
      Bosnia and East Timor prior to intervention--but it could.

    * The force should be American or American-led, rather than under a
      UN mandate. This appears to be eminently "doable" today.

    * The force should be stationed in Palestine (not in Israel), and
      should monitor peace arrangements that comprise a separation both
      of forces (however small the "buffer" zones) and ideally of
      populations between Israel and Palestine. This implies that the
      international force would be deployed at a relatively advanced
      stage of the peace process, when trust has been reestablished and
      the two sides agree on the outlines of their future coexistence.
      Alternatively it could be deployed after a unilateral withdrawal
      by Israel, for example from the Gaza Strip. In contrast, the
      introduction of a genuine international force under current
      circumstances, where settlers and Palestinians occupy the same
      geographical space and the Israel Defense Forces patrols most of
the territories, would probably be disastrous.

None of this precludes the deployment of small and temporary American or
other monitoring teams to oversee security measures mandated, for
example, by phase I of the roadmap. Israel has been broadly satisfied
with the performance of such an EU unit over the past two years.

But Israel has very understandable historic reasons for treating any
more expansive proposals for the introduction of international forces
with great caution. They don't always succeed in improving security. And
in certain circumstances they can do more harm than good.

