It is virtually impossible to assess in real time the role of Israeli
and Palestinian intellectuals in influencing the course of events
between the two peoples. We need the benefit of perspective in order to
understand the intellectuals' impact, or lack thereof, on any given
issue. Yet even with perspective the task is difficult.

Suppose, for example, that an idea floated by a group of Israeli
academics is adopted five or ten years later by the government of the
day, which claims that it arrived at the idea as a consequence of its
own analysis of key recent events. Obviously, no one can prove a cause
and effect relationship. Israeli intellectuals, generally free of any
governmental constraints on their freedom of expression, almost always
also operate independently of governmental sponsorship or patronage,
hence cannot easily gauge their own influence. They can only disseminate
their ideas and hope they percolate through to the top, either directly
or via public opinion.

This issue was a frequent preoccupation when I was at the Jaffee Center
during the 1980s and early 1990s. Much of our research and writing was
devoted to the Arab-Israel conflict and the possibilities of peace with
Syria, Lebanon, and the Palestinians. We felt confident that the ideas
we disseminated were exercising influence on the decision-making
echelon, but there was absolutely no way to prove it unless the
politicians themselves acknowledged this--which politicians, not only in
Israel, rarely do.

Thus, for example, in 1989, at the height of the first intifada, we
published a comprehensive and systematic study on Israel's options for a
Palestinian settlement. It concluded with a recommendation that the
government give serious consideration to dealing directly with the
Palestine Liberation Organization, and not reject the possibility that a
political process would eventuate in a Palestinian state. While we were
not the first to propose these ideas, we were probably the most
mainstream, and our recommendations were rooted in solid research and
analysis. We also found funding to disseminate our conclusions widely,
and the media gave them broad coverage.

Prime Minister Shamir's angry reaction to our conclusions at the time
seemed to us only to confirm that we had struck a blow for better
understanding of the decisions facing the country. (There were also,
incidentally, voices within the university that objected to our academic
foray into "politics".) Today our conclusions are at least rhetorically
the foundation for the approach of yet another right wing prime
minister. Yet I have little doubt that Ariel Sharon would testify that
his approach derives, not from academic research, but from a vast array
of realpolitik considerations.

Currently, one key area in which Israeli intellectuals are playing a
leading role concerns the demographic consequences of ongoing occupation
or even of the absence of a negotiated two state settlement. In recent
years, demographers and geographers, some with a right wing orientation,
have published research urging a very far-reaching Israeli approach to
territorial compromise, in order to ensure the future Jewish and
democratic nature of the state. Elements of this analysis appear to have
found their way into mainstream political discourse--but not yet into
decision-making.

Viewed from the Israeli side of the conflict, Palestinian intellectuals
seem to face a different set of considerations. To a large extent they
see themselves as part of a patriotic struggle for independence, hence
subject to certain agreed narratives (e.g., "the 1967 lines") that have
no parallel on the Israeli side. Moreover, the Palestinian leadership
exercises pressures to conform to these assumptions. Still, despite what
appears to be a lesser degree of independence, by Arab standards
Palestinian intellectuals seem to be relatively free to express
themselves. And within their self-imposed or externally-imposed
constraints, some do appear to exercise influence over decision-making.

One striking example of the niche carved out for themselves by
Palestinian intellectuals under sometimes difficult circumstances is
polling. Palestine has freer and more comprehensive opinion polls than
any Arab country. Yasir Arafat was, to say the least, not pleased with
his popularity ratings when they began to surface in opinion polls. Yet
he undoubtedly follows them closely--as do Israeli security circles,
which have confidence in their credibility. Another area where
Palestinian intellectuals have clearly exercised influence concerns
governmental reform and the campaign against corruption.

Perhaps the most striking example of Palestinian intellectual
independence is Prof. Sari Nusseibeh's advocacy of abandoning the demand
for a "right of return" to Israel. He has been able to advocate his
position--which constitutes a far-reaching challenge to a seemingly
sacred tenet of the Palestinian struggle--without too many constraints.
And while he appears to have few Palestinian followers, i.e., exercises
little immediate influence, the long-term effects of his campaign can
only be speculated upon. Nor can we ignore the courage mustered by
Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas--a politician and an
intellectual--in unequivocally condemning Palestinian terrorism.

Over the years, when Israeli and Palestinian intellectuals have met in
informal discussions of the conflict and its solutions, there have
usually been far more diversity and more soul-searching among the views
presented by Israelis than by Palestinians. Indeed, many of the latter
frequently "coordinate" their participation with the Palestinian
powers-that-be. The Israelis undoubtedly have more independence; but in
some cases the Palestinians may have more influence.

