Inside Palestinian circles, the discussion over the use of "violence"
versus "non-violence" is referred to as a debate over "methods of
struggle," all of which are aimed at trying to bring to an end the
Israeli occupation. That occupation is considered an illegal belligerent
military occupation in the eyes of international law, and there are at
least two United Nations resolutions that support the Palestinian right
to resist the Israeli occupation. The question is how to resist
successfully?

That issue has been one of constant debate among Palestinians, some of
whom argue that non-violent struggle is more effective simply because
Palestinians, as the weaker party in physical terms, must rely on the
support of the outside world and Western public opinion. Because
Palestinians have already modified their political positions and demands
in order to fit the relevant United Nations resolutions, these people
argue, also adopting an unarmed resistance strategy would be more
acceptable to those outside and consequently more "attractive" to
international public opinion. People holding that view point to the
Intifada of the eighties as an example of how massive popular
non-violent resistance can improve the international image of the
Palestinian cause and increase its support.

Others counter that in our particular case, non-violent struggle may
bring us some international sympathy, and probable admiration, but will
not truly transform the situation on the ground, i.e. end the
occupation. Israel has demonstrated that it does not care about
criticism from the world, these Palestinians say. They point to
instances when Israelis have reverted to their defense mechanism of
calling international criticism "anti-Semitism", returning to a kind of
ghetto mentality where the external criticisms have little effect and
cannot bring about meaningful and significant political developments.

These people believe that Israel is a pragmatic society and, therefore,
only when Israelis are personally affected by the Palestinian struggle
will they take seriously claims and positions of the other side. They
also shore up their argument by noting that the Israeli occupation
itself is violent in nature and therefore should be returned with force.
Most of the practices of the occupying Israeli army are carried out
through violence. Land is violently confiscated, houses violently
demolished, people violently arrested, not to mention the violent
killing of civilians that has characterized the occupation not only over
the last two years.

Recently, and after roughly two years of armed confrontations that have
not brought Palestinians much closer to their objectives, the debate
over methodology has become quite prominent. Much of this discussion
concentrates on the suicide bombings undertaken largely by Islamic
groups that have their own political and ideological agendas.

As this debate continues, however, the aggressive Israeli behavior on
the ground supports the arguments for an all-out armed struggle. Indeed,
Israel seems to care little about what kind of resistance Palestinians
are using; its methods are intended to shut down all dissent. In the
first weeks of the Intifada, for example, Palestinian public protests
and civilian demonstrations were answered brutally by Israel, which
killed tens of unarmed protestors.

But one needn't return to the start of the Intifada for examples of
Israel's heavy-handed suppression. Just look at the height of the recent
siege of President Arafat's compound, when his life appeared to be in
real danger and Palestinians took to the streets in massive non-violent
demonstrations. In those unarmed demonstrations, entire Palestinian
families could be seen out breaking the Israeli curfew: mothers, fathers
and children expressing their dissent.

Still, the Israeli army response was deadly. After not much more than
one hour of demonstrations, the Israeli army had left in its wake five
dead bodies, three others clinically dead, as well as 67 injured
Palestinians, according to Palestinian hospitals.

There are three ways to encourage the use of popular unarmed protest in
the Palestinian struggle. The first has to do with Israel's behavior. If
the Israeli army does not differentiate between those carrying a flag or
banner and those carrying a gun, then those who prefer violence and the
possibility of incurring damage to the other side will always curry
favor with the public.

Second, the use of unarmed protests should bear fruit. In other words,
the demands and activities of those pursuing this method of fighting
occupation should give the impression to the public that their way is
getting results. Otherwise, the demonstrations will be neither
convincing nor credible nor popular.

Finally, those who encourage non-violent methods of struggle against the
occupation must have dialogue and joint activities with Israelis who
promote peace and justice in order to back up Palestinian unarmed
resistance with Israeli protests against Israeli violence. Such joint
activities should also be supported by third parties, including
organizations and activists. In other words, there must be a coalition
for peace that includes Israelis, Palestinians and internationals that
are working jointly to criticize all violence, whether it comes from
Palestinians or Israelis. That coalition cannot give the impression that
it sees less importance in violence used to kill Palestinian civilians
or confiscate Palestinian land than in violence used to kill Israelis,
in particular Israeli civilians. The only way to stop Palestinian
violence is to simultaneously stop the violence of the
occupation.

