Egypt's involvement in the search for a way out of the
Israeli-Palestinian crisis is growing. Egyptian interest in the
disengagement plan initiated by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon has
not faltered despite the bitter political struggle over the plan within
the Israeli government. Nor did it diminish even when Palestinian
spokespersons objected to the pressures exercised by their Egyptian ally
on the Palestinian leadership and to Egypt's undisguised interference in
the internal affairs of the Palestinian Authority.

The angry political discussion taking place in Israel between the pro
and anti-disengagement camps is seen by Cairo as an internal Israeli
affair. Of course, Egypt's involvement is not intended to aid the
government of Israel, and certainly not its head. Sharon was and is
anathema to most of the Egyptian public and its leaders.

Rather, Egypt's growing involvement is a direct consequence of the
assessment of the government of President Husni Mubarak concerning the
grave Middle East situation generated by both the turmoil in Iraq and
the Israeli-Palestinian confrontation. The two crises feed upon one
another, and together nourish regional instability. The
Israeli-Palestinian crisis has become brutal, and its prolongation
increasingly threatens the vital national interests of additional Arab
states--first and foremost Egypt and Jordan, which border on the
conflict. Daily reports of heavy Palestinian casualties have a
cumulative effect on Egyptian public opinion. Anger directed at Israel,
as well as at United States activities in Iraq, frequently also takes
the form of sharp criticism of the neglect exercised by the Egyptian
authorities. This emanates today not only from the traditional
opposition, but from spokespersons identified with the Egyptian public
mainstream.

Under a heavy screen of diplomatic niceties, the Egyptian leadership
believes that the Bush administration's Middle East policies are at
fault, and may even be exacerbating the situation. But the complex
nature of the ties between the two countries dictates caution on the
part of the Mubarak government, in order to avoid a crisis in its
relationship with Washington. Cairo well appreciates that this
relationship is also being tested. Hence its involvement in advancing an
Israeli-Palestinian settlement is part and parcel of Egypt's overall
policy toward the only superpower.

Egypt's role at this stage is also facilitated by the unique approach it
has taken to the Palestinian Authority since the crisis began in the
fall of 2000. For years Egypt consistently and successfully cultivated
its status as patron of the PA and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat. It
took upon itself a variety of tasks at various stages of
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations. Not everyone was happy with the
Egyptian performance. Sharp criticism, rarely justified, emanated from
both Israel and the US, alleging that Egypt avoided playing a
significant role in ending the conflict, or even thwarted the process.
(The critics ignored the fact that neither Israel nor the US offered the
Mubarak government a role that would correspond with Egypt's political
agenda.) Jerusalem and Washington argued that Egypt's decision not to
exercise its full influence on the Palestinian leadership was one of the
causes of the failure of final status negotiations. Egypt rebuffed these
accusations, and maintained a constant dialogue with Arafat and his
advisers, even as Israel and the US claimed that the Palestinian leader
was no longer relevant and constituted an obstacle to peace.

True, on a number of issues Egypt took issue with the Palestinian
leadership. Mubarak and his emissaries have called for changes in the
PA, including a decentralization of the authority held by President
Arafat. But the two actors remain in agreement regarding the strategic
objective of a two-state solution along the June 4, 1967 borders. The
Egyptian leadership played the "Arafat card" deftly; hence it now has
the opportunity to play an instrumental role in the Israeli-Palestinian
crisis.

The decision to increase its involvement in the conflict undoubtedly
strengthens the standing of the Mubarak regime as a force for moderation
and stability in the otherwise threateningly unstable Middle East. The
cultivation of this image, along with the commitment to peace with
Israel, remains a constant guarantee for the ongoing flow of intensive
and vital external aid to Egypt. But this was not an easy decision for
the authorities in Cairo. There is considerable concern lest Egyptian
forces in Gaza be drawn into the eye of the storm and sustain
casualties. On the other hand, public opinion is liable to regard a
limited Egyptian force in the Gaza Strip as a vanguard; if the violence
there continues, this could strengthen the voices of those who have
already demanded that a more significant force be dispatched to protect
the Palestinians--thereby possibly precipitating the kind of
unprecedented crisis with Israel that Egypt has successfully avoided
over the years.

In the complex reality of today's Middle East, any new initiative can be
influenced by an infinite number of factors. Will Sharon's disengagement
plan be carried out in the end? Will it indeed generate a renewal of the
political process, or, God forbid, escalate the conflict? Will the
leaders of the two belligerent sides, and particularly Arafat,
contribute to stabilizing the situation? Only the answers to these and
additional questions will tell us the nature of the local and regional
ramifications of the unprecedented Egyptian involvement in seeking a
solution.

