Non-violence, unlike pacifism, is not a philosophy that conceptualizes
or envisions a harmonious world, as in "and the sheep shall dwell with
the wolf." Indeed, this is a political tactic that takes conflict as its
point of departure and seeks the advantage over its opponent. The use of
non-violence is not simple--it requires the recruitment of large numbers
of participants along with operational coordination, all at a level that
generally exceeds what is required for violent tactics; hence it also
requires leadership of the highest quality. It is easier to recruit a
few hot-headed youth who are prepared to blow themselves up in a second
and earn the status of martyrs, than to recruit thousands of everyday
citizens of all ages and walks of life, to stage a sit-in day and night,
fast, or boycott goods and vital services as an expression of resistance
to occupation or to some other injustice.

Notably, in the vast majority of cases the weaker party in a force
equation opts for non-violent techniques of struggle because it believes
that in this way it will gain favorable public opinion in the world or
shatter the unity of the other side. The use of non-violent resistance
is dependent on context, time and the balance of forces. Accordingly,
whoever adopts this tactic in one circumstance is not necessarily
obliged, ideologically or practically, to adopt it under a different
circumstance. The reverse is also true: whoever opts for violence under
one set of circumstances can, when they change, switch to non-violence.

Thus, in view of the increasingly negative reactions worldwide to the
use of suicide bombings in the current Palestinian Intifada, together
with the tough Israeli military reactions which have in effect brought
about a renewed occupation, and the large numbers of casualties--there
are growing calls among the Palestinians for shifting the emphasis from
violent to non-violent resistance (e.g., the initiative of a-Shafi,
Dakkak and Barghouti, the petition by Palestinian intellectuals against
suicide bombings, etc.) In most cases this is a call not to cease
completely all reliance on arms against Israel, but rather for a partial
or gradual transformation of the means of struggle.

What is likely to be the Israeli reaction to such a change? At the
government level, we may assume that a significant move to adopt
non-violent struggle would be perceived by most decisionmakers as a
serious threat to Israel's interests. If indeed suicide attacks were
replaced, say, by mass sitdown strikes or by commercial strikes,
blocking of roads and the like, then international public opinion,
together with decisionmakers in key countries, would presumably welcome
such a development and increase their support for the Palestinian cause.
Domestically, too, it would be more difficult for the government of
Israel to recruit public support for suppressing acts of non-violent
resistance than for deploying military force against Palestinian centers
of power after bloody terrorist attacks.

Dealing with mass non-violent demonstrations of resistance also demands
particularly creative planning in order to disperse the demonstrations
on the one hand, but without enhancing the resistance leadership and
without losing support domestically and abroad, on the other; it is not
at all clear whether the Israeli decisionmaking system as currently
constituted is capable of dealing with this challenge. Hence we may
assume that the government's response would be to highlight the violent
incidents which undoubtedly will yet take place at Palestinian
initiative, even if the overall trend on the Palestinian side is likely
to be non-violent. Moreover the government would attempt to portray the
shift to non-violence as a tactic designed ultimately to defeat Israel
by alternative means, rather than as a preliminary step toward returning
to sincere peace negotiations.

Some information regarding the anticipated reaction of the Jewish public
in Israel to a Palestinian shift to non-violent resistance can be found
in the results of a survey carried out recently by the American
organization Search for Common Ground. In general the survey's findings
indicate that a majority of this public--78 percent--supports the right
of the Palestinians to act to achieve an independent state of their own,
if toward that end they invoke non-violent means. Sixty-three percent
stated that the government of Israel should not try to prevent
Palestinians from organizing non-violent mass demonstrations. A
majority, 52 percent, also believe that Palestinians have the right to
oppose expansion of settlements by non-violent means, and 52 percent
argued that if the Palestinians were to employ only non-violence for a
significant period of time, the government of Israel would have to
respond with concessions in negotiations over the borders of a
Palestinian state.

Yet only 9 percent of Israeli Jews felt it was likely that a non-violent
Palestinian resistance movement would indeed emerge. In this sense, all
these instances of Israeli openness seem more like an abstract
intellectual exercise than a solid public stand in favor of Israel
responding positively to Palestinian non-violence. Further, in view of
the Israeli Jewish public's ongoing stand in favor of the policies of
the Sharon government and its deep distrust of Palestinian intentions,
an intensive information campaign by the government would likely shift a
majority of the public to a position of sharp opposition to a
Palestinian non-violent resistance campaign--if indeed it were to be
launched.

