The Egyptian role in the Israeli plan to disengage from the Gaza Strip
is one of two major modifications Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
introduced after first failing to gain the support of his own party for
his disengagement plan. The other is the gradualism whereby this plan is
supposed to be implemented in several phases. Most recently, Sharon
decided to have his cabinet vote on each phase separately. From a
Palestinian point of view, this gradualism is an additional problem with
a plan that never excited the Palestinians for the following reasons: it
does not fit within the roadmap
                                                , is not based on
international law, will not improve the situation in the West Bank, and
does not give the impression that it is a step toward the eventual end
of the occupation.

The proposed Egyptian role in this modified plan is perceived positively
by the Palestinian leadership, which has traditionally had good
relations with Egypt, but it is controversial among the Palestinian
public. The Egyptian role is delicate, because it is based on two
objectives: (1) trying to satisfy Israel's security needs on the
Gaza-Egypt border, and (2) helping to improve Palestinian security by
restructuring, training, and rehabilitating the Palestinian security
forces in Gaza to enable the Palestinian side to fulfill its commitments
in the first phase of the roadmap.

In addition to the plan that Egypt discussed with the Palestinian side,
the Egyptians also presented certain demands to the Israeli side: the
necessity of a full and complete withdrawal from the Gaza Strip and an
end to Israeli hostilities and violence against Palestinians, including
assassinations, incursions, home demolitions, and so on. In addition,
Egypt is also requiring that Israel ease measures in the West Bank,
especially those related to Palestinian daily life, such as restrictions
on movement and other Israeli measures considered by the Palestinians
and the international community as illegal collective punishment.

As a result of these objectives and requirements, the success or failure
of the Egyptian intervention will depend on the Egyptians' ability to
get the two sides to deliver their commitments simultaneously. The main
reason for the failure of previous attempts--Zinni
                                             , Tenet
                                             , and the Mitchell
                                                 commission--was that
Israel always succeeded in convincing the American mediators to accept a
sequential rather than simultaneous approach. If Israel started by
withdrawing, dismantling some settlements and ceasing to expand others,
ending the policy of restricting Palestinian movement, and continuing to
fulfill other requirements of the roadmap, then the Palestinians--who
remain ready to fulfill their corresponding obligations to the
roadmap--would be able to do so simultaneously. However, if the
Palestinians are expected yet again to start first, while Israel
continues its usual practices (including assassinations, home
demolitions, movement restrictions and settlement expansion), then
history will repeat itself yet again, and we will find ourselves further
embroiled in the continuing cycle of violence.

The main difficulty Egypt will face in this role is the fact that
internal Israeli politics are not conducive to any positive change. The
developments in Israel regarding Sharon's plan showed everybody that the
current Israeli political elite in power is not mature enough to move
forward on the basis of international law as embodied in the roadmap.
For this reason, a continuous international role, especially by the
United States--the only country that can influence Israel--is a
necessary component for success.

