Israelis have learned in recent weeks of two new initiatives for
renewing the political process with the Palestinians. One is a set of
understandings drawn up by teams led by Israeli Foreign Minister Peres
(including Uri Savir and Avi Gil, former and current directors general
of the Foreign Ministry) and Abu Ala, speaker of the Palestinian
Legislative Council. These state that a ceasefire will take hold and
confidence building measures be instituted within six weeks. Within
another eight weeks Israel will recognize a Palestinian state in
accordance with United Nations Security Council Resolution 242,
immediately after which negotiations on all outstanding final status
issues will commence, to be completed within 9-12 months. The final
status agreement will be implemented within another 9-24 months.

The second initiative calls for Israeli President Moshe Katsav to appear
before the Palestinian Legislative Council and call for a hudna, or
truce. The Assembly will then reciprocate by declaring a hudna for one
year, and within a short time negotiations will be renewed. Egyptian and
American sources were reportedly involved in developing this initiative,
alongside Israelis and Palestinians.

Both initiatives are described here on the basis of press reports and
interviews. Few details are known, nor are we familiar with the specific
calculations and assessments that informed the various parties in
developing these initiatives. We do know that Israeli Prime Minister
Sharon rejects their substance, while Palestinian leader Arafat has
generally avoided comment, and Peres has also rejected the hudna
approach. Indeed, precisely because the leaders appear to have no
substantive strategy for peace and are all deeply suspicious of one
another, there seems to be little chance that these or any other peace
initiatives will take hold in the near future.

Nevertheless, under present circumstances any new political initiative
is to be welcomed. Both the Peres-Abu Ala and Katsav plans have much to
recommend them. Yet based on what we know about them, both, sadly,
appear to reflect a distinct reluctance on the part of the two sides to
learn and apply lessons from the failure of the Oslo process. Only if we
analyze the weaknesses or faults of the Oslo concept as they emerged
over the years, and draw lessons for the future, can we hope to ensure
that the next agreement doesn't suffer a similar fate. Since no
political agreement is perfect, let us learn from this one. In the
present context, three examples will suffice.

First, it was counterproductive to base the entire Oslo process on
United Nations Security Council Resolution 242. Israel and the
Palestinians do not agree as to whether 242 applies to all or only part
of the territories of the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem
("territories" or "the territories"). Moreover, 242 was designed to deal
with the consequences of the 1967 war, whereas some key
Israeli-Palestinian final status issues, like refugees, are 1948 issues
not resolved by 242, or "eternal" issues like Jerusalem that are ignored
by 242. Yet the Peres-Abu Ala understandings, in a kind of knee-jerk
ritual, once again choose to base a Palestinian state solution on 242.
Already we have heard Israeli spokespersons explain that this means the
Palestinian state will initially be confined to the 42% of the West Bank
and 80% of the Gaza Strip now in Palestinian hands, with the rest up for
negotiation--while Palestinians explain that the understandings in
principle deliver up all the 1967 territories to the Palestine
Liberation Organization, with negotiations centering on the modalities
of transferring remaining territories.

This takes us right back to square one. It would be far better to take
as a basis for agreement some more clearly defined set of principles,
such as "demographic separation within rational borders," or at least to
determine that the first issue for negotiation is an agreed
interpretation of 242.

A second drawback of the Oslo concept is its reliance on phasing. In
September 1993 there may have been no alternative to a phased interim
process; the parties were not ready for final status talks. But we must
recognize that the Oslo interim phases were an abject failure: rather
than building confidence and economic prosperity, they destroyed them by
exposing the process to repeated attack by extremists from both sides.
Here again, the Peres-Abu Ala plan is dependent on phasing, while the
Katsav hudna plan also involves a risky one year first phase and says
nothing about what is to follow.

The objective, then, should be a process that establishes final status
arrangements within a minimal time span and with as few phases as
possible. Yet even in the best of circumstances a minimum of time and
phasing is necessary in order to move from conflict to peace. This
brings us to the third lesson of Oslo: it made no provision for
mandatory third party arbitration. Consequently, when disagreements
arose over interpretation of the Oslo Declaration of Principles or Oslo
II, the parties had no obligatory regulatory mechanism to turn to. In
contrast, it was only such a provision in the Egyptian-Israeli peace
treaty of 1979 that enabled the two sides to isolate and then resolve
the Taba dispute without jeopardizing the peace. In the
Israeli-Palestinian case the extreme power imbalance between the two
sides exacerbates their disputes over the interpretation of agreements.

In this regard, both Peres-Abu Ala and Katsav would be well advised to
insist that the US or some other agreed third party be stipulated as the
arbiter of any disputes that may arise regarding the interpretation of
their agreements. That is the least the two sides can do to increase the
chances for success under the present very trying
circumstances.

