Israeli-Palestinian relations have visibly entered a new phase, as the
two exhausted sides appear to be rethinking their conflict policies
after over 38 months of stalemated fighting. The indicators of the
change are obvious. On the Palestinian side, the rise of Abu Ala (Ahmed
Qurei) as prime minister has led to a new ceasefire initiative, which
could serve as a platform for upcoming negotiations with Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon. At the same time, there is a growing recognition
in Israel that a decisive military victory over the Palestinians is
beyond reach, and that therefore some compromise could serve the
country's interests better than a prolonged war of attrition.

The mutual fatigue, which has already brought both Israelis and
Palestinians to lower the conflict's intensity, gives the current effort
to stop the violence a better chance to succeed than previous, failed
attempts. Other factors support this optimistic assessment. Sharon has
lost his magic grip over Israeli public opinion, and lags behind in his
approval ratings. The Israeli consensus over the war has been torn
apart, as the previously mute left wing regained the political
initiative with a series of endeavors, from the refusenik pilots to the
Geneva accords and the public warning by four retired security chiefs.
Under domestic attack, Sharon pledged a new diplomatic initiative, and
hinted at a possible removal of settlements in Gaza as part of a
unilateral package.

Sharon faces strong criticism from the right and within his Likud Party,
but powerful players have adhered to his new, moderate tone. The Israel
Defense Forces, which have long advocated a forceful showdown in order
to "burn the Palestinian consciousness" against using terrorism, have
changed course. Instead of using more force, the military now advocates
a quick withdrawal from Palestinian West Bank cities and entry into
negotiations, fearing that "time is on the Palestinians' side". Ehud
Olmert, Sharon's loyal deputy, calls for a deep unilateral withdrawal
from the occupied territories, in order to save Israel's Jewish majority
and character. Olmert's call is heresy by Likud standards; nevertheless
Sharon tacitly backed him, signaling that Olmert is his political
pathfinder.

Abu Ala has tried his best to avoid the hurdles which ruined his
predecessor Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas) and led to the latter's swift
resignation. The new premier avoided meeting Sharon before forging a
Palestinian consensus. He even refrained from asking for American
support, while Washington was careful not to "hug" him. And most
importantly, instead of appearing to oust Yasir Arafat, Abu Ala has
willingly bowed to the veteran leader's authority and declared himself
his loyal subordinate. By giving away any claim to wield security
authority, Abu Ala aimed to keep Arafat on his side. Sharon has
grudgingly accepted the new-old order, and even praised Abu Ala's
political experience and shrewdness as good signs.

Alas, the same factors also work against the new calming efforts and
diminish their chances for success. Sharon's weakness guarantees that he
will find it difficult to recruit political support for compromise. True
to form, following an initial moderate opening Sharon resorted to his
usual threatening mode, and warned the Palestinians that if they fail to
make a deal with him, they might be locked behind fences and remain in
control of less than half of the West Bank.

Israel treats Abu Ala in a cold, businesslike manner, without the summit
atmosphere that enveloped its dealings with Abu Mazen. But this obvious
lack of enthusiasm makes it harder to convince the wary Israeli public
that there is a new opportunity. Moreover, Israel disapproves of Abu
Ala's declared policy of prolonged ceasefire rather than the uprooting
of terrorism, and rejects outright his demand to stop security fence
construction in the West Bank. And the Arafat patronage may have helped
legitimize Abu Ala domestically, but the old leader's return to center
stage is an assured recipe for trouble with Israel, especially since all
Palestinian security forces report to Arafat.

The American distance from the scene will only grow as the November 2004
presidential elections draw closer. Washington is still engaged in
micromanaging the conflict, mainly to prevent Israel from prejudging the
final status through fence and settlement construction. This is
insufficient, however, to draw both sides toward a genuine compromise.

But the main obstacle for a real breakthrough has not changed since the
outbreak of violence in late summer 2000: Israel's proposals are far
below the minimum acceptable to the Palestinians. Even the "virtual"
Geneva accord                                               , which
bespeaks a better deal for the Palestinians than the rejected Barak
proposals of Camp David and Taba, failed to gain strong Palestinian
endorsement. Clearly, the Palestinians will never accept any less
generous proposition by Sharon, even if he continues down the path of
withdrawal and settlement evacuation.

Thus there is a good chance for a period of relative quiet. But the
underlying causes of the conflict are bound to undermine it eventually
and prevent any deeper change.

