A rapid succession of major developments throughout the past two weeks
has rendered the Israeli-Palestinian situation both very volatile and
extremely fluid. Such a dynamic situation can be understood better by
asking questions than by jumping to conclusions.

Beginning with the current Israeli offensive: What will be the long term
effect of the Israel Defense Forces' undoubted military achievements in
the West Bank? Israel has killed and arrested terrorists, confiscated
ordnance, and gathered intelligence proving Palestinian leader Yasir
Arafat's direct complicity in the worst acts of terrorism. Will this
"buy" a reduced level of terrorism for half a year, or for a month? How
will the respite, if achieved, be exploited politically? And what of the
negative effects--the thousands of additional Palestinians who have been
alienated and humiliated and will now join the ranks of terrorists?
Moreover, isolating Yasir Arafat has rendered him more popular than
ever. To "win", all he has to do now is survive.

A military move that is not accompanied by a realistic Israeli peace
plan, along with unilateral withdrawal and dismantling of settlements in
Gaza and the West Bank heartland and a more aggressive United States
role, appears to have little chance of improving the situation even in
the medium term. Here, then, we encounter the limits of Israeli military
power vis-a-vis the Palestinians.

Turning to the Arab League peace proposal of late March, which was based
on the initiative of Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah, we confront a truly
extraordinary document. The proposal, with its emphasis on the 1967
borders, a "just solution" to the refugee problem (rather than the
provocative "right of return"), security and "normal relations" for
Israel, and an "end of conflict", offers an Arab League strategy for
peace at a time when neither Arafat nor Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon has such a strategy. But doubts still linger. Why, for example,
did the same Arab League summit issue a separate statement supporting
the right of return?

This brings us to US President George W. Bush's initiative of early
April. At the time of writing it is still not completely clear what
motivated this turnabout, and how serious it is. Is Bush's sharp and
undoubtedly justified condemnation of Arafat his main message, or is it
essentially rhetoric, designed to conciliate pro-Israel American lobbies
that Bush depends on for support, while he undertakes an endeavor that
will oblige him to pressure Sharon? In sending Secretary of State Powell
to the region, demanding an immediate end to Israel's offensive, and
referring to the need for Israeli political gestures (ceasing settlement
activity, ending closures), is Bush announcing once and for all that
political and security measures must go hand and hand and the US will
now undertake to "bang heads together" to make them work? Or is this
just another attempt to placate Arab and European criticism for a few
weeks, brake the rise in oil prices, or reduce the profile of the
conflict, however briefly, prior to an attack on Iraq?

Or is the Bush initiative all of the above? It depends how long and how
hard Powell persists. After all, he has already visited the scene before
and generated only damage--agreeing to Sharon's now abandoned demand for
seven days quiet; he made a powerful speech on the conflict at
Louisville in January that led nowhere; and he and the president have
already sent General Zinni here three times without an adequate mandate.

One possible indication that Bush and Powell are serious this time was
provided by Sharon himself when he opted in early April to expand his
coalition toward the right by recruiting the five mandates of the
National Religious Party. The NRP, now led by a retired general who can
only be termed a messianic fanatic, is the most outspoken advocate of
the settlements. Would the NRP join a government that is contemplating a
settlement freeze as mandated by the Mitchell Report and President Bush?
Accordingly, will the moderate Labor Party soon leave the government and
trigger the countdown to new elections? How will this influence American
readiness to apply additional pressure on Sharon?

Finally, turning to the escalation of Hizballah and Palestinian attacks
along Israel's northern border with Lebanon--will heavy western and Arab
pressures persuade Syrian leader Bashir al-Assad to curb Hizballah? What
sort of escalation might be generated by an Israeli military response
against the attackers' Syrian patron? While none of the Arab states
seeks a conventional war with Israel, the present situation encourages
radical Arabs and Iranians to pursue the option of low-level warfare
against Israel by non-state proxies like Hizballah, Hamas and Tanzim.

This brings us full circle to the issue that generated the current
escalation. When an Islamic summit that convened last week in Malaysia
refuses to define suicide bombings of civilians as terrorism, there can
no longer be any beating about the bush: Islamic/Arab suicide terrorism
has placed the Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the fault line of the
clash of civilizations. There is a huge moral equivalency issue here.
Israel, and for the most part the West, insist that there is a critical
and definable difference between the deliberate targeting of
civilians-terrorism--and the inadvertent, inevitable and regrettable
casualties sustained by civilian populations in the course of a
legitimate war of self defense against terrorism. Most of the Arab and
Islamic worlds insist there is no difference, and many Arabs and other
Muslims now glorify the role of suicide bombers.

They are glorifying barbarism. This is a major obstacle to
peace.

