In politics there is a vast difference between the ability to influence
the policy-making process and simply hoping for change. At the moment,
that difference is grossly in evidence with regard to the position of
some Palestinian and Arab circles toward the re-election of George W.
Bush. Over the past four years, these circles have suffered tremendously
from Bush's policies in the region, his unquestioned support for Israel,
his war on Iraq, and the ramifications of the so-called war on
terrorism. However, they have never actively stood up to these policies.
Rather, they meekly waited in, as it turned out, the vain hope that Bush
would not win a second term.

After Tuesday's vote, these people will now cling to the possibility
that changes will nevertheless occur over the next four years. This
wishful thinking is based on the assumption that, in his second term,
the US president will be free of the pressures from special interest
lobbies and influential electoral groups whose votes he no longer needs.
As such, some people argue that Israel's influence on President Bush
will decrease along with the influence of the pro-Israel lobbies. This,
they reason, will ultimately lead to him taking on more positive and
balanced policies, especially when it comes to a political settlement
and the establishment of a sovereign, independent and viable Palestinian
state on the 1967 borders. As evidence of the validity of their theory,
such people point to the concerns and fears expressed by Israeli circles
in this regard.

It would be a terrible mistake, however, to resort to such a superficial
argument. It is true that Bush could free himself from electoral
pressures in his second term, but this depends on his desire to do so.
Hence, the question remains: does Bush really want to change his policies?

The answer, in my opinion, is a resounding no. There are three reasons
for this. First, Bush's perspective in his policies toward the region in
general and Israel and the Palestinian cause in particular are guided by
ideological and religious beliefs and not only political and
interest-based politics. This ideological vision springs from the
convictions of the American right, particularly the neo-conservatives,
and will continue to determine America's policies toward the region.

Second, Israel has become an integral part of domestic rather than
foreign policy in the United States, and Israel enjoys wide popular
support. Hence policy decisions are made not only in the White House but
also in Congress, and any American president or even a presidential
candidate cannot afford--even if he wanted to--not to take this into
consideration.

Third, in order for there to be any radical change in American policies
toward the Arab region in general and the Palestinian case in particular
the total absence of any Arab effort in applying pressure on Washington
must be rectified. The Arab effort in this regard has been reduced to a
matter of pleading. Pleading is evidence of weakness and will not change
any policies. On the contrary, it only invites exploitation.

Having said that there will be no change in Bush's policies toward the
region and the Palestinian cause during his second term, however, does
not mean there will be no action toward a political settlement behind
the scenes. On the contrary, Bush is very interested in this especially
since Israel has a stake in it and given that Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon wants his withdrawal plan from Gaza to be a success.
Sharon's interest lies in his desire to determine the form of any
Palestinian state according to Israeli interests.

In addition, Bush's allies, Britain in particular, want to mend
American-European relations and they want to address the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, as well as the reckless policy toward Iraq
and the Arab region in general. In this regard, the US may push for a
political settlement to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict to appease its
European allies, especially since both Washington and Israel believe
that the absence of President Arafat from the political scene will open
the door for a Palestinian acceptance of a minimal settlement.

However, those Palestinians and Arabs who express optimism in this
regard should prepare themselves for tremendous pressure to accept a
settlement according to Israeli conditions, which would grant them only
a nominal "state" with limited "autonomy." If these people expect Bush
to pressure Israel into accepting the establishment of an independent
and sovereign Palestinian state on the 1967 borders, they will remain
what they always have been--delusional.

