The irony in examining how the Oslo accords
                                            are referred to in today's
parlance is that those who support the accords believe that they were
responsible for the only progress to be made in the history of the
conflict and that the departure from their text is the reason behind the
current peace process collapse. Those who oppose the Oslo agreement, on
the other hand, believe that it is largely responsible for the chaos and
failure that we are now suffering.

In any case, the debate over how to proceed, as well as political
groupings in both Palestinian and Israeli societies, continue to be
based on one's position vis-a-vis the Oslo accords, which means that
Oslo continues to be seen as a cornerstone in constructing political
positions concerning the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The most recent
example of this can be found in local and international discussion of
the recent appointment of a new Palestinian prime minister. Both here
and abroad, the quoted credentials of newly nominated Prime Minister
Ahmad Qrei' include his integral part in negotiating the 1993 Oslo
agreement.

In thinking about Oslo, one major characteristic that must be pointed
out--and that Israelis often forget or ignore--is that the three years
prior to the outbreak of the intifada in the year 2000 marked the only
sustained period in the history of the Israeli occupation that was not
marred by violence between the two sides, barring a few minor
exceptions. The reason was that the Oslo framework offered Palestinians
the impression, rightly or wrongly, that it was about ending the
occupation, at the same time that it gave the Israeli public the
impression that Oslo would bring peace and an end to the conflict.
Unfortunately, the politicians did not live up to the expectations of
their respective publics. It is impossible, in evaluating what went
wrong, to ignore the major turning point that occurred when a Jewish
terrorist assassinated Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who was to a large
extent responsible for both allowing Oslo to happen, and seriously
pursuing its implementation.

Unfortunately, the very same political mindset that characterized that
assassin now dominates the Israeli government. The Israeli peace camp,
which might be represented by the slain Rabin, remains in the
opposition. This situation sums up the essence of the change responsible
for the difficulties we face in resuming the negotiations process.

By the same token, the changes that are now happening within the
Palestinian political arena are irrelevant to the chances of resuming
the Oslo peace process, simply because the major disputes we are seeing
are not between the Oslo peace camp and its opponents, but rather within
the same peace camp that made Oslo possible. Whether we have Mahmoud
Abbas or Ahmad Qrei' as prime minister, whether we have President Arafat
alone in the leadership or alongside a prime minister, Palestinians will
remain under the very same leadership that brought us the Oslo peace
process and years of quiet.

