Q: You have recently advocated that the United States take
the lead in creating an international force and imposing a solution on
Israelis and Palestinians. Does the current initiative from US President
George W. Bush correspond with this proposal?

A: Bush is arriving at the right approach, only late. I hope not too
late. Bush learned a negative lesson from the intense involvement of the
Clinton administration and became cautious. His approach was
understandable but unacceptable. It failed to address American interests
in view of the potential for overall escalation. Bush fears failure, but
the current situation is a worse failure from the standpoint of American
interests. If the Middle East continues to burn, Bush's war against
terrorism will seem increasingly pathetic. There has to be another stage
after the war in Afghanistan, but it is impossible under current
circumstances. No one comes here happily to intervene. Bush may not want
to, but he will have to separate Israelis and Palestinians in order to
act against Iraq with the Arab world on his side.

Q: Where does the prospect of an Israeli unilateral move
toward separation fit into your scheme?

A: If I thought an alternative solution would work, I would advocate
it. I have no problem with a fence, but the fact is we're not doing it.
What's easier to deploy, a fence or an international force? Indeed, let
the international force construct the fence. It will need it.

Q: Will this be a fighting force?

A: No one can guarantee the safety of such a force, but it is safe
to assume that neither side would be crazy enough to declare war on the
US and the entire international community. The force would also have a
strong economic component. The Palestinian territories are in
catastrophic shape, everything is destroyed, there is no economy and no
work. Even if we achieve a ceasefire now, but leave the territories to
their own devices, everything will explode again. Hence we need not only
an international force, but an international mandate to rehabilitate the
territories.

Q: Does the Arab League-approved Saudi initiative complement
or complicate the international force idea?

A: If I were President Bush I would convene an international
conference, with UN, US, EU, Russian, Arab (including Palestinian) and
Israeli participation, to discuss the League's proposal. By moving the
conflict from the Israeli-Palestinian sphere to the Israeli-pan-Arab
one, it becomes possible to avoid the trap of Mitchell-Tenet-Zinni,
which under current conditions leads to a dangerous dead end, and to
offer a glimmer of hope to the people of the region. This would also
help Israelis and Palestinians climb down from the roof. Currently
neither is prepared to take the first step. The sides should negotiate
on the basis of the Beirut summit decisions, and an international force
must arrive to separate Israelis and Palestinians.

Q: Are Bush, Sharon and Arafat "ripe" for such an American
initiative?

A: Bush is becoming "ripe". I don't know about Sharon and Arafat.
Hence we need to speak in terms of imposing a settlement. Israeli public
opinion swings widely from one option to another because it sees no
realistic alternative. Here, for the first time in a year and a half,
there will be a reasonable alternative to Sharon's policies. If the US
takes the lead, Israeli opinion will shift dramatically. With such a
real option on the table and public approval, the government will
acquiesce. If not, the international community can invoke sanctions.

Q: Meanwhile Sharon is bringing the National Religious Party,
with an extreme leader, into the Israeli governing coalition.

A: The world will see Sharon's move as the Israeli reply to the
positive initiatives of Bush and the Arab League.

Q: Does Arafat want an imposed solution? Many in Israel have
frequently argued that he wants to "internationalize" the conflict.

A: I wish I knew. And I wish I were certain that what he wants
serves the interests of his people. If the international community,
including his friends in Europe, threatens him with a final divorce, I
hope he'll be rational enough to acquiesce.

Q: How do Egypt and Jordan fit into US considerations?

A: The responsible regimes in the Middle East are in danger of
collapse under local and regional pressure. We all see the intensifying
demonstrations in Cairo and Amman. In order to prevent collapse, Arab
leaders like Egypt's President Mubarrak and Jordan's King Abdullah may
be forced to abandon moderation. Experience shows that war erupts in the
Middle East even when no one wants to fight. The 1967 war is a case in
point. The US has good reason to fear the possibility that responsible
regimes in the Arab-Muslim world will collapse under local and regional
pressure.

