The Oslo agreements                                             were not
a coincidence of history. In practical terms, the Israeli and
Palestinian leaderships finally agreed that violence got them only
deeper into trouble. In political terms, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin
and Chairman Yasir Arafat needed the legitimacy of a deal. In conceptual
terms, the Oslo agreements, signed in September 1993, had been conceived
15 years earlier, in September 1978, when Prime Minister Menahem Begin
and President Anwar Sadat signed the Camp David accords.
                                            

After twelve years of political stagnation and the unleashing of a
steadily growing vicious circle of violence, the concept of the Camp
David accords was revived, and was put on the table in a moderate form
during the second secret meeting held in Norway. At the first meeting,
in January 1993, heading the very small Israeli team, I made it clear to
my Palestinian interlocutors that Palestinian self-government in
agreement with Israel would lead to a two-state solution, Israel beside
Palestine, and Palestine beside Israel, both committed to good
neighborly relations.

Following one hundred years of bitter conflict, none of us imagined that
the way to peace would be easy. We also understood that the two-stage
concept defined in the Camp David accords of 1978 created two major
problems:

First, it was open-ended, i.e. the difficult issues of sovereignty over
territories, borders, settlements, Jerusalem and refugees were all not
dealt with and the search for a compromise solution was postponed, by
agreement, to the next stage. And secondly, the two-stage approach gave
plenty of time for both sides' spoilers to get organized and to
undermine the Oslo agreements.

We knew all of this. We also knew that the most logical way out, to go
immediately to a single stage comprehensive Israeli-Palestinian peace
agreement, was not doable; no preparatory work had been done and neither
the Israeli nor the Palestinian leadership was yet willing to tell the
public what the price for peace would be.

We thought that the way out would be to start immediately with the
preparatory work and then move very fast from the first interim stage to
a comprehensive peace agreement. This work took 14 months, and was
concluded at the end of October 1995. Earlier the same month, Prime
Minister Rabin announced in the Knesset that he wanted to conclude a
comprehensive peace agreement with Arafat before the next elections,
scheduled for October 1996. Rabin informed President Clinton that he had
chosen to move along the "Palestinian track", and hence would not
negotiate with Syria. We also knew that by moving towards a two-state
solution we destroyed ideological beliefs on both sides--the dreams of
greater Israel and of greater Palestine. Those who were committed to
these dreams would not easily renounce them.

Today we are in a similar situation to that of 1978. Then we had the
Camp David Accords. Today, we have the Clinton proposals
                                               , the roadmap and the
Arab plan                                               .

Failed negotiations can be of great historical relevance as they often
produce concepts and ideas that do show the way for conflict resolution.
The Clinton proposals suggested the restitution of 97 percent of the
territories of the West Bank and Gaza occupied in 1967, a comprehensive
plan to deal with the Palestinian refugee issue and the division of
Jerusalem into a Jewish and a Palestinian city.

The roadmap, issued almost two years later and supported by the US
government, the European Union, Russia and the United Nations, devised a
three-stage plan to get there. First, end violence and create
stabilization; second, establish a Palestinian state with provisional
borders; and third, go for a comprehensive peace deal.

In spring 2002 in Beirut, an Arab summit conference agreed on a
complementary plan that could actually lead the way to peace between
Israel and all 22 Arab states, in the event that the roadmap and the
Clinton proposals were put into practice.

At the moment, every side still fears that the other side is out to
trick it. Yet on the Israeli side, most of the taboos preventing a
permanent status agreement have been broken. The PLO has been
recognized, the majority of Israelis supports the two-state solution,
the partition of Jerusalem is no longer a taboo, and the understanding
on territorial arrangements is that they will have to be based on the
June 4, 1967 line with equal exchange of territories. It is not certain
that the taboos have been broken on the Palestinian side. In order to
reach a deal, the Palestinian side will have to recognize that the
Jewish people has the right to exercise its right of self-determination
in Israel. Regarding the refugee issue, in the common search for a fair
and just resolution, both sides will have to recognize that the right of
return of the Palestinian people is to their homeland the State of
Palestine whereas the right of return of the Jewish people is to their
homeland the State of Israel.

Any student of history knows that the moment when both the Israeli and
Palestinian peoples have conceptually agreed on the guidelines of a
peace agreement, getting there will only be a question of time and
political architecture.

In my view, we should all agree that the time has come to redouble our
effort and get there as soon as possible.

