The Israeli political system is on the verge of massive transformation.
Traditional distinctions between left and right, doves and hawks, are no
longer valid. From the Likud on the "right" to Meretz on the "left," the
vast majority of the Israeli people is converging around the idea of a
two-state solution.

Aware of the existential threat caused by perpetuating the current
status, there is a growing civil non-partisan movement of Israelis
dedicated to a unilateral disengagement from the Palestinians via a
substantive attainable plan, aimed at safeguarding the vital interests
of Israel as a Jewish, democratic state. Guided by a realistic analysis
of the geo-political realities of our region, it seems that
unilateral--although coordinated--disengagement offers a viable
alternative to the dangerous, endless cycle of violence that prevents
any serious peace negotiations.

In the absence of a comprehensive governmental disengagement initiative,
Israel's society, economy, security and major institutions will continue
their current decline. For us Israelis this is truly a matter of life
and death: if we fail to meet the current demographic challenge, we
ourselves will be the agents of the destruction of the State of Israel,
and the Zionist dream will thereby come to an end.

Two assumptions should be made from the outset:

First, despite Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's "historic" December 2003
Herzliya speech                        and his recent statement about a
plan to evacuate the Gaza Strip, the Likud Party, currently holding 40
seats in the Knesset, is constrained by its internal central committee
whose politics are significantly more right wing and militant than those
of Likud's overall constituency. As a result of this schism, the party
has neither the capacity nor the will to bring about a disengagement
from the Palestinians in any way that would require more than the
relocation of just a couple of settlements. Likud's official stance
suggests that it has no real intention to ever negotiate a permanent
status agreement.

Secondly, the international community, led by the United States, the
United Nations, the European Union, Russia and moderate Arab states,
such as Egypt, Morocco and Jordan, will support any practicable platform
offered by Israel within the framework of the roadmap. Such support
might include, under particular conditions, the introduction of an
international force to the territories. Such an Israeli initiative,
being pre-coordinated rather than fully unilateral, has therefore a
chance to obtain international legitimacy.

Disengagement between the two peoples has been the underlying logic of
the political process since the early 1990s. However, it seems that
permanent status is not to be reached in the near future. There is
therefore a need for a substantive, well-established plan, one that
would be both responsible and attainable, aimed at safeguarding the
vital interests of the State of Israel and reinforcing national security
in the broadest sense.

A prerequisite for achieving these goals is an initiated unilateral
disengagement--to borders dictated by the needs of security and
demography--as part of a responsible and sovereign decision of the
government of Israel.

The following are the essentials of the plan:

    * The temporary border for this initiated unilateral disengagement
      will be designed to safeguard Israel's vital security, political,
      demographic and economic interests, in addition to the interests
      of settlement and infrastructure. In this scheme, over 80 percent
      of settlers in Judea and Samaria will remain within the borders of
      the State of Israel, while a minimal number of Palestinians will
      also be included;

    * Israel will receive solid long-term international guarantees that
      promote the stability of the region;

    * The Palestinians will not have the right of return to the State of
      Israel;

    * Concurrent with the establishment of the Palestinian state, the
      historic conflict between the sides will be declared at an end. As
      a condition for its establishment, Palestine will be demilitarized;

    * Jewish Jerusalem will be the capital of Israel, while Palestinian
      al Quds will be the capital of the Palestinian state. The area of
      the holy sites will come under a separate special regime, which
      will guarantee unimpeded access and freedom of worship to members
      of all religions;

    * Israel will support any effort towards international/third party
      involvement in the running of the Palestinian territories until
      the setting up of a responsible Palestinian government; and finally

    * Negotiations on permanent status will resume parallel to the above
      process in order to lead to a final comprehensive agreement on all
      core issues including, but not limited to, the final borders
between Israel and Palestine.

Thus a national security and foreign policy plan would be established,
combining unilateral disengagement with a call to simultaneously renew
permanent status negotiations. It would foster international US-led
involvement in the territories and aim at pursuing negotiations,
possibly on the basis of either President Clinton's parameters or the
principles of any of the other recent peace initiatives.

