Truth be told, given the irreversible nature of the ongoing Israeli
military operation and given the nature of the United States
administration's position, it is very difficult to see any way out of
the current bloodshed. This Israeli reoccupation of
Palestinian-controlled land is creating its own dynamic that will be
very difficult to reverse, in particular because the Israeli government
seems not only to be applying pressure or weakening the Palestinian
Authority, but entirely eliminating Palestinian security capabilities.

In addition, by officially declaring President Yasser Arafat and the
Authority as enemies of Israel, the government led by Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon has eliminated any political negotiations role for
the Palestinian Authority. The goal clearly seems to be to leave the
Palestinian Authority with no other role but that of administrator.

The Palestinian side refused the Zinni amendments to the Tenet and
Mitchell papers precisely because they included clauses that legalized,
in effect, what Israel is doing right now. In other words, Israel had a
plan to downgrade the Authority, which it pursued first through security
negotiations, and then when this failed, through force.

In this, the Israeli government has two main motives--first, Sharon's
strategic objective of reversing the peace process, its achievements and
its agreements, due to his ideological objections to territorial
compromise and his desire to maintain Israeli control over all of
historical Palestine, and second (and more immediate), the goal of
forcing the Palestinian Authority to accept Israel's ceasefire terms,
which permit Israel to play a security role in the Palestinian territories.

There is no doubt that Israel has won the media and public relations
aspect of this ongoing battle, particularly in the United States, simply
by deluding the public and officials to believe that all this onslaught
is simply a reaction to Palestinian suicide bombings. It is little noted
that when Israel entered Palestinian refugee camps for one week, killing
an average of 15 Palestinians, largely civilians, on a daily basis,
Palestinian, Israeli and foreign analysts all said that Israel was
inviting a violent Palestinian reaction.

As such, Palestinians sometimes wonder about the specific nature of the
American concern over suicide bombings. Is that concern so strong
because these terrible attacks are suicidal and therefore seemingly
irrational and unstoppable, or is that concern intensified because these
attacks result in extensive civilian casualties? If the concern is over
civilian casualties, then it is only fair that Americans should be
equally concerned over Palestinian civilian casualties from Israeli army
actions, seen here as a form of state terrorism of an entire populace.

There is one difference between Palestinian suicide attacks against
Israeli civilians and Israeli army attacks against Palestinian
civilians. That difference is that Palestinian suicide bombings take
place in the context of the aggressive military occupation of
Palestinians and are a response to both that occupation and the Israeli
army attacks that occur in implementing that occupation through force
and humiliation.

But despite this, Palestinians and the Arab states have done their part
in pointing to a way out. They did so by adopting the Saudi peace
initiative, which offered Israel not only Palestinian, but Arab
willingness to bring about a comprehensive final peace and normalization
in return for an Israeli withdrawal to United Nations-sanctioned borders
in Resolution 242, as well as a solution to the refugee problem,
according to United Nations Security Council Resolution 194.

In return, not only did Israel respond officially that this was
unacceptable, but also timed its reoccupation of the Palestinian
territories for the very same day of the Arab summit's approval of its
peace initiative.

A further immense hurdle to finding a way out is Washington's complete
adoption of changing Israeli positions. In light of Israeli
unwillingness to adhere to signed agreements, international legality and
bridging proposals such as the Tenet and Mitchell plans, the US remains
the only power that can influence the Israeli position. It appears then
that the Middle East conflict is mired in internal American politics,
which are preventing, if not paralyzing, decisive action on the part of
the US administration at the very least to have Israel respect
US-sponsored papers and initiatives. The only influencing factor on the
official American position seems to be the growing anger on the Arab
street, and then only because that anger threatens the stability of
American allies in the region. No matter that those friendly regimes are
among the least democratic and most repressive in the region.

This latest Israeli operation is one more permanent step towards the
reoccupation of all of the Palestinian territories, and one that
introduces a new dynamic towards further replacing peace negotiations
with confrontational relations. The logic of force, as recent and
ancient history has taught us, is that it only brings about further
forceful reactions. When any neutral observer views the nature of the
carnage inflicted on Palestinian civilians--whether they be the
demolition of homes on top of entire families or the blocking of
ambulances or the prevention of the International Committee of the Red
Cross from evacuating bodies and the injured or the restriction of
journalists from witnessing ongoing events--they will understand that it
is perfectly natural now to expect all kinds of violent Palestinian
retaliation and revenge. Ultimately, Israeli attempts to achieve the
legitimate goals of peace and security through the illegitimate means of
inflicting pain will fail, just as they have failed since Sharon's rise
to power.

Thus, the only conclusion we can draw is that there will only be a way
out when the Israeli public and government are ready to end the Israeli
occupation. Because even in this dire state, the Palestinians who are
resisting the Israeli occupation are still insisting that they want no
more than its removal. They will not take less--but they aspire to no
more.

