Recent weeks have marked a clear decline in both the international
backing and internal support enjoyed by the Israeli government led by
Ariel Sharon. This was most recently illustrated by polls that gave
Sharon his lowest public approval rating to date, and enunciated by the
pronouncements of Israeli politicians from the right, by Ehud Olmert, to
the left, by the security leadership or the Geneva crowd.
Internationally, United States President George W. Bush was the most
explicit he has ever been in criticizing the policies of the Sharon
government.

As these events take place in parallel to a deterioration of Israel's
image in the eyes of the world public, it is thus easy to conclude that
they are the combined and inevitable outcomes of the policies and
practices that have dominated Israeli government thinking for the last
three years. The insistence on the use of force (and if that doesn't
work, the application of more force) has brought us all before the
conclusion that the Israeli government and its prime minister are
responsible for the stagnation of the peace process and for the inhumane
conditions in which Palestinians are living.

In parallel and ironically, the Palestinian state of affairs seems to be
moving in the opposite direction. After a chaotic several months
following the fall of the government of Mahmoud Abbas, the subsequent
emergency government, and a period of tension between the presidency and
the prime ministry that caused a dramatic deterioration in the
credibility of the Palestinian Authority both among Palestinians and
internationally, things have been running rather smoothly since the
inception of the government of Ahmed Qurei. There has been a healthy
cooperation between the prime minister and president, and the outside
world has agreed to these arrangements (which are more acceptable to
Palestinians and will be useful in fulfilling Palestinian obligations in
the course of the peace process).

These positive signs have been further underscored by the progress of
the dialogue between the Palestinian Authority and its opposition, held
under the auspices of the Egyptian government. This dialogue, which
ended with an offer of a partial mutual ceasefire that avoids the
targeting of civilians, has the potential of developing into a full
ceasefire initiative. If so, the ceasefire will further expose the
Israeli government position and Sharon's intransigence, and Qurei will
be viewed internationally as someone who is capable of sorting out
internal Palestinian problems, and opening the way for efforts towards
peace.

Israel is plagued by two very powerful symbols in its battle to recoup
its image. These are the separation wall, which we Palestinians
pointedly call the "apartheid wall", and the some 187 military
checkpoints marking the Palestinian landscape in an immense diagram of
the humiliation and suffering that touches all aspects of Palestinian
life. Israel has yet to find a means of explaining these tools of
possession and control to the world.

In this situation, it seems a suitable time for a third party to exploit
the weakness of Ariel Sharon and the positive developments on the
Palestinian side to come up with an initiative endowed with the proper
political weight and backed by the Quartet (thus avoiding American
election distractions). This initiative should broaden the ceasefire and
try to make it stick by adding other necessary components. Of these, the
first is a political component, i.e., convincing Israel to stop
constructing settlements and building the wall, in order to relieve the
major sources of tension between the two parties. The second component
is economic and humanitarian and requires removing the checkpoints,
taking the Israeli army out of Palestinian populated areas, and
injecting the economy with some donor support. Looking at the respective
positions of Qurei and Sharon right now, a package like that seems to
hold great promise.

