The most fascinating aspect of Israeli politics in recent weeks is the
intellectual and political ferment within the non-religious political
right. Spurred on by a decline in public support, reaction to the Geneva
accord                                               , harsh criticism
from serving and retired senior security officials, and American
pressure, right wing politicians and academics have begun seriously
discussing a unilateral Israeli withdrawal from parts of the West Bank
and Gaza.

As one prominent right wing academic put it to me recently, "Okay, the
left is right about the demographic threat. We have to withdraw on our
own to avert it." While this may sound to many like a painfully belated
realization of the obvious, it represents a significant recognition on
the part of important figures within the Likud that Israel must not seek
to hold onto all of the land, and that only separation into two states
will enable Israel to remain a Jewish and a democratic state.

Thus Deputy Prime Minister Ehud Olmert's dramatic statements of recent
days concerning unilateral redeployment should not be understood as an
ideological departure by a lone Likudnik, nor, alternatively, as merely
an explicit echo of the leaks and hints emanating from the prime
minister's office over the past month. Rather, something is happening
within a broad circle of Likud politicians and supporters, and Olmert
wants to grab the reins of leadership.

Welcome as these voices are, they unfortunately represent a very
partial, hence dangerous, understanding of the ramifications of the
demographic and political reality. In short, this "new right" appears to
believe that it will "solve" the demographic problem by effecting a
limited dismantling of a relatively small number of settlements, fencing
in the remaining 50 percent or so of Palestinian territory in the West
Bank, unilaterally designating this enclave a "state", declaring this
political process--which could be presented as fulfillment of phase II
of the roadmap--to have guaranteed Israel's long term welfare as a
Jewish and democratic state, and emphasizing that any further
negotiation is either impossible, or could be resumed in no less than
five, or 10 or 15 years--which in our part of the world is an eternity.

Here we confront yet another instance whereby ideas and proposals
generated by the Israeli left are embraced by the right, but only at a
cost of hopeless distortion. First the right hijacked the fence idea and
moved it deep into the West Bank, where it takes on a political rather
than security significance. Now it is proposing to politicize unilateral
withdrawal as well. This began as a move by the left to save Israel
demographically while not creating new political facts, and leaving all
territorial issues (i.e., the fate of the Jordan Valley and other
territories remaining in Israeli hands following unilateral withdrawal)
for further negotiations, to be renewed as soon as the Palestinians
field a realistic and responsible leadership that is truly committed to
a two state solution. Now it is presented by the right as the creation
of a political fait accompli: we create a Palestinian enclave state; we
may even annex the remainder; we postpone any further discussion for an
indefinite period of time; and we expect the Palestinians and the rest
of the world to acquiesce in this new reality.

They will not acquiesce. Indeed, Palestinians could react with an
escalated terror campaign in Israel and abroad, and/or by dissolving the
Palestinian Authority and appealing to the world to "rescue" them. The
conflict would get uglier, and conceivably draw in Israel's neighbors as
well.

How representative this thinking is of Prime Minister Sharon's real
strategic approach--or, alternatively, to what extent these proposals
influence his strategy--is not at all clear. While they do satisfy
Sharon's fundamental commitment to maintaining control, however
indirectly, over the West Bank and Gaza, it is still hard to imagine the
prime minister dismantling settlements to make it happen, insofar as in
recent months and years it is he who has presided over the expansion of
those settlements with the aim of fragmenting the Palestinian presence
and ensuring long term Israeli control over key roads and hilltops. But
if this is merely a game of smoke and mirrors by Sharon, such is clearly
not the case with other key right wing personalities who have become
genuinely alarmed by the demographic threat, yet do not seem capable of
thinking through the dangerous consequences of mere half-measures that
ignore the basic political needs of the Palestinians and actually
exacerbate the conflict. (An alternative and more sympathetic analysis
suggests that this pragmatic right fully understands the situation but
cannot for the moment move any further away politically from its more
hawkish constituency.)

Unfortunately, too, events on the Palestinian side seem unlikely to
confront the right with a realistic alternative. Even if a ceasefire of
sorts emerges from Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei's current efforts, it will
not involve any serious effort by him to confront the terrorist
infrastructure, which is really too powerful now for him to challenge.
True, Israel helped bring this about, but the real catalyst remains
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, and he is now comfortably back in full
control.

These developments would appear to preclude any serious effort at a
renewed peace process, even if Sharon were willing and US President Bush
were inclined to get involved--which they are not.

