There is an intriguing theory making the rounds; it argues that a second
term Bush presidency will address the Israeli-Palestinian conflict more
energetically and aggressively. According to this line of thought,
President George W. Bush has for some time been unhappy with Israeli
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's performance, particularly on the
settlements. In addition, Bush is aware of the need to "deliver" on the
Palestinian issue in order to placate Arab and European allies who are
deeply troubled over the unfolding course of events in Iraq as well as
in Palestine. Besides, he is the first American president to officially
endorse the creation of a Palestinian state, and he means what he says.

In a second term, so the theory goes, Bush will be far less beholden to
extreme pro-Israel lobbies like the evangelical Christians that support
him. Finally, with Yasser Arafat apparently out of the way, an
additional obstacle to deeper Bush administration involvement will have
been removed.

I am skeptical regarding this scenario--particularly during the coming
year. For one, it assumes that Bush really would like to get involved in
Arab-Israel peacemaking, even though nothing he has done or said in the
past four years reflects such a predisposition. More significantly,
Bush's Middle East agenda will be dominated, as before, by Iraq: he has
to make the American experiment there look good while removing American
troops from harm's way. The few serious allies the US has in Iraq are
not preoccupied with the linkage between Iraq and the
Israeli-Palestinian issue. Or, if they are, as in the case of PM Tony
Blair of the UK who is under strong political pressure at home, their
efforts to implement the roadmap will be dispensed with by Bush at the
rhetorical and symbolic levels: a White House statement, an
international conference.

As for the moderate Arab leaders, Bush appears to have accepted the
argument of his neo-conservative advisers that they are paper tigers and
that the threat posed by the "Arab street" is a bluff. Everything he
presumes to have learned in the past 18 months since the occupation
began tells him that Iraq comes before Palestine.

Second on Bush's agenda of Middle East priorities is Iran, which is
assessed to be only months away from a point-of-no-return in developing
nuclear weaponry. Bush will be determined in his first year to stop the
Iranians--either through international sanctions imposed by the UN
Security Council in concert with the other major powers, or by
preempting militarily against the Iranian nuclear project. The latter
course of action would undoubtedly have far-reaching consequences for
the rest of the Middle East--but that is a separate issue.

Third, and only third on Bush's agenda is the Arab-Israel conflict, and
in particular the Israeli-Palestinian issues. Bush has endorsed Sharon's
disengagement plan; as long as it is seen to be progressing, Sharon is
not likely to be pressured to do more than dismantle a few outposts.
Bush will wait until after a first round of settlement dismantling and
IDF withdrawal from Gaza and the northern West Bank before assessing
whether a renewed peace process is possible. In the meantime he'll focus
US pressure on any new Palestinian leadership to deliver on security in
Gaza. On the other hand if disengagement fails, the almost certain
corollary will be new Israeli elections during 2005--another deterrent
to American pressure or energetic involvement. One way or another, we
find ourselves approaching the 2006 US mid-term elections, when Bush
won't want to rock the boat for the Republican majority in both houses
of Congress.

Here it behooves us to recall that, in the post-9/11 period, George W.
Bush has, for better or for worse, revolutionized American Middle East
strategy. For the first time in years, the Arab-Israel conflict is not
the primary focus of US policy. Instead, the focus is Washington's
perception of the Middle East as a failed region that is the origin
Islamic fanaticism and possibly a base for weapons of mass destruction
aimed at the United States, thereby obliging the US to preempt
militarily and strike at the heart of the region in order to reform it.

There is little room in this concept for the Israel-Arab conflict;
beyond Washington's neglect of the Palestinian issue, note how
indifferent it has been to Syria's attempts to renew its peace process
with Israel. There is nothing to indicate that in Bush's second term
this grand strategy is going to change. This is what a second Bush
administration is likely to do and not do in the Middle East in its
first year. Assuming that disengagement takes place and that no dynamic
and stable Palestinian (or Israeli) partner for a peace process emerges
in the coming months, the best contribution Bush can make during the
remainder of his four year term would probably be to ensure that a
second phase of disengagement, including the dismantling of settlements,
takes place deep inside the West Bank. This would at least keep the
two-state solution alive, pending the emergence of better leadership in
both Jerusalem and Ramallah as well as a US administration with a
different orientation toward the Middle East.

