A large majority of Israelis today favor separation, or, in Israeli
parlance, disengagement. Indeed, the only exceptions are the political
extremes, the settlers on the right and Palestinian citizens of Israel
on the left, both of whom favor ongoing integration, though with
radically different purposes in mind.

Yet among Israeli supporters of disengagement or separation there are
also two very different schools of thought. Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon and parts of the non-religious right, who have only recently
adopted the idea of disengagement, appear to favor an Israeli withdrawal
from all or most of the Gaza Strip and from a much smaller portion of
the West Bank--possibly only a few settlements in the north. Their
objective is not clearly stated. Sharon refuses, at least publicly, to
endorse the demographic rationale for separation, although some evidence
suggests that this is his primary reason, and concentrates on the
security context. He also appears to believe, without any foundation in
reality, that the territory remaining under Palestinian rule can, by
gerrymandering and creative construction of overpasses and bypasses,
somehow be construed as "contiguous," and that it will, once abandoned
by Israel, be seen by the world as a viable state.

Some of the right wing advocates of disengagement pay lip service to the
notion of renewing negotiations regarding additional parts of the West
Bank at an indeterminate time in the future, with a more responsible
Palestinian leadership. But they also insist that the partial Israeli
withdrawal they envisage must be sustainable over the long term--that it
constitute a political "solution." Accordingly they seek to thicken the
pattern of Israeli settlements in those parts of the West Bank where
Israel remains--the Jordan Valley, greater Jerusalem and western
Samaria--and if possible to use fences to define this area, which totals
around half the territory. Moreover, because Sharon continues to do
nothing to stop settlement expansion even inside the areas allegedly
slated by him for Israeli withdrawal, his commitment even to limited
disengagement is not fully credible in the eyes of many.

At the other end of the Israeli disengagement spectrum are those,
primarily on the left and center, for whom separation or disengagement
means Israeli withdrawal from the entire Gaza Strip and most of the West
Bank, with the exception of the Jordan Valley, the green line settlement
blocs and East Jerusalem. They would signal the Palestine Liberation
Organization that this is an interim measure, that those parts of the
West Bank and East Jerusalem that remain under Israeli rule are being
held temporarily, pending a renewal of negotiations, and that their
status will not be altered in the interim. They want the fence to follow
the green line and favor a Palestinian state with borders based on that
line. And they have a clearer set of rationales: the demographic threat
to Israel as a Jewish and democratic state, improvements in Israeli
security, and the need to negotiate a two state solution with a more
responsible Palestinian leadership as soon as possible.

The Bush administration in Washington employs rhetoric that appears to
reflect general support for the Israeli center-left approach: a green
line fence, no action taken that might prejudice an eventual two state
solution based on the 1967 borders. But its involvement in the conflict
has never been particularly energetic, and it has already displayed a
dangerous propensity to acquiesce in unilateral moves by the Sharon
government, such as settlement construction, that more closely
approximate the right wing approach.

Both schools of Israeli thought cite Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's
record supporting or tolerating terrorism and his failure to
convincingly acknowledge Israel as a legitimate Jewish state, and reject
the option of negotiating with a Palestinian leadership led by him. This
is their shared point of departure for the disengagement or separation
idea. Both stop short of advocating any sort of severing of
infrastructure and labor ties. They recognize that cutting these links
would cause extreme hardship for Palestinians, hence more instability
and extremism. Both recognize that this sort of separation will not end
Palestinian terrorism, but both believe that disengagement coupled with
fencing will at least ameliorate the day-to-day security situation for
most Israelis.

There are exceptions to these camps and there are grey areas in between
them--Deputy Prime Minister Ehud Olmert's ideas fall into such a grey
area--but by and large this describes the views held today by an
overwhelming majority of Israelis. For Palestinians, who are
understandably apprehensive about Israel's plans, as well as for
Israelis who fear that the Jewish nature of Israel will be compromised
by demography, the key difference between the two Israeli schools of
thought is absolutely crucial.

One approach uses separation to perpetuate overall Israeli control and
prevent the emergence of a viable Palestinian state. In so doing it
actually endangers the viability of the Israeli state. Because the
Palestinian statelets it creates will not be viable, Israel will be held
responsible, while Palestinians will abandon their quest for a two state
solution and begin to insist on "one man, one vote".

The other Israeli approach remains committed to a viable two state
solution--it certainly does nothing to preclude it--while creating
better conditions for Israel to survive in the interim as a Jewish and
democratic state, and better conditions for Palestine to improve its own
security control. But it does not guarantee a successful two state
solution.

For that we need not just Israeli, but also Palestinian and American
leaders with a more realistic strategy for peace and long term
coexistence.

