If all things go as planned, Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei and
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon will likely meet this week or the
following one. For some time, the peoples of the region and outside
officials and observers have been awaiting this important meeting. In
fact, this meeting has been awaited ever since Sharon took power in the
2001 Israeli elections. Since that time he has refused to meet with
Palestinian leaders until what he calls "terror attacks" end. Sharon
also vowed not to meet with elected Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat
whom he has placed under virtual house arrest for the past two years.

True, Sharon met Prime Minster Mahmoud Abbas, but that event seems to
have evaporated like a morning mist, because obviously no issue of
substance was discussed.

It is unclear where the meeting will take place. Undoubtedly, Mr. Sharon
will pass on the suggestion that it be held in the /muqata'a/
(Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's Ramallah headquarters) and Mr. Qurei
will undoubtedly refuse to meet on Palestinian lands that lie on the
other side of the wall. Geneva is of course out of the question for the
Likud leader, and the idea of Sharon's farm in the Negev will not gain
Palestinian approval.

The Palestinian and Israeli publics are too exhausted to pay attention
to the final location of the meeting. These last three years have seen
so much killing, destruction, fear and hatred that the slim light of
hope offered by any meeting will be much more important than most other
details.

Of course, there is no doubt that for Palestinians and Israelis this
upcoming meeting will mark an indirect recognition by both parties of
their failure. Neither side can claim to having succeeded in landing the
knockout punch to the other. Most Palestinians and Israelis are more
like tired boxers in the 100th round, in which neither is able to win
nor willing to admit defeat.

That is why the various political ideas (Yossi Beilin and Abed Rabbo's
Geneva), the signature drives (Sari Nusseibeh and Ami Ayalon's People's
Voice), as well as the various statements of the Israeli army chief of
staff, former security chiefs and the pilots all add to the pressure on
the leaders to get moving.

In order to break the cycle of violence, the idea of one side crushing
the other side must be removed. Israeli thinking that yet one more
assassination will cause the Palestinians to crumble and the Palestinian
belief that one more suicide attack will cause the Israelis to raise the
white flag have proved to be futile. India's Mahatma Ghandi once said
that an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth leaves the whole world
blind and toothless. There has to be a stop to this zero sum game and a
return to a sane policy based on reciprocity, compromise and reasonability.

Prime Minister Qurei is correct in trying to put an end to the craziness
of the past three years during which the cycle of violence has not
ceased. The past shows that the first order of business must be a
ceasefire between the Israeli government and all its military and
intelligence subsidiaries on the one hand, and the Palestinian Authority
with all the Palestinian factions, on the other. Such an agreement must
put an end to all types of military and armed attacks, as well as
assassinations. This agreement needs to be monitored by a neutral third
party. This could be done by the Quartet, led by the United States of
America.

Finally, such a ceasefire must be supported by concerted round-the-clock
negotiations aimed at ending the basic reason for the violence, namely
the occupation of the Palestinian areas and determining the issues of
borders, settlements, refugees and Jerusalem. At present the Palestinian
people and leadership seem to be genuinely ready for a settlement.
Israelis are also ready. The big question is whether the Sharon
government is willing and able to make an historic agreement.

