I have no doubts; it is just a question of time. Once again we shall see
delegations of Israel and the Palestinians sitting around the table and
renewing their negotiations. The two sides seek it, need it and are ripe
for it. I don't know when this will happen, but we have to prepare for
that day, now. We cannot permit the process that begins again to end
again in crisis and deadlock.

I see three obstacles that the two sides will have to overcome.

First and foremost--the establishment of a national leadership on both
sides that really and truly believes in the need to reach historic
compromise; compromise based on painful bilateral concessions;
courageous concessions, without which there can be no settlement. We are
all well aware of the parameters of the anticipated agreement. We can
call it the Clinton formula, the Camp David or the Taba agreements. The
problem is not the content of the agreement, but rather a leadership
that understands that there is no other way, a courageous leadership
capable of persuading its people, Israelis and Palestinians, to choose
this path.

The second obstacle is the practical expression of the painful
concession. A political agreement, once achieved, will oblige the
leadership to enforce its decisions among domestic opponents. We know
well who the opposition will be, who will try to sabotage and thwart
these decisions by force. We know the extremists in Israel and the
extremists among the Palestinians. Again, the two leaders and the two
leaderships will have to call upon both courage and strength to do their
duty.

The third obstacle is perhaps the most problematic of all. Both Israel
and the Palestinians will have to convince one another of the sincerity
of their intentions. They will have to remove the psychological barrier
of lack of confidence that has been there all along, and that has grown
and expanded particularly during the past two years of insane violence.

Twenty-five years ago we witnessed the dramatic visit of Egyptian
President Anwar Sadat to Jerusalem. In his historic speech in Jerusalem
he spoke of the fact that 70 percent of the conflict is the
psychological barrier between the two sides. "My visit here, in
Jerusalem," he continued, "has toppled that psychological wall!" I
expect the Palestinians to persuade me, as Sadat did, of the sincerity
of their intentions.

But I am well aware that we bear the same obligation toward them.

I will begin with a move that echoes Sadat's visit to Jerusalem. As
prime minister of Israel I will invite whoever heads the Palestinian
political entity at the time, to come and address the Israeli people
from the podium of the Knesset. True, the words will be addressed to the
people of Israel, but this will also be a first class gesture to the
Palestinian masses. The Israeli prime minister's reply will present the
main points of his plan for immediate action, even before negotiations
have begun and before any agreements are reached.

Again, as prime minister of Israel I will convene a cabinet meeting that
will confirm "the end of the Israeli occupation of the territories of
the West Bank and Gaza Strip." I'll make sure the language of the
resolution speaks specifically of the "West Bank" and not "Judea and
Samaria." This will be accompanied by a second resolution, the complete
cessation of expansion of settlements in these areas, and an additional
gesture: the removal of all Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip.

Immediately thereafter, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) General Staff
will meet in the presence of the prime minister. At this meeting the
prime minister and minister of defense will issue a directive for the
immediate withdrawal of IDF forces from areas A and B, and transfer of
full responsibility for the needs of the population to Palestinian
hands. Orders will be issued to IDF forces to cease addressing the
Palestinian people as enemies. From that moment on, they will become
residents of a neighboring Arab country with whom we intend to live in
peace. And as a symbolic step, this meeting will also decide on
cancellation of the position of "Coordinator of Government Operations in
the Administered Territories"' and transfer of all liaison and
coordination operations from the IDF to a special civilian authority
under the Prime Minister's Office.

An additional gesture: the unilateral, massive release of Palestinian
security prisoners.

Utopia, you say? Perhaps. But in the words of the father of the Zionist
movement, "If you will it, it is not a dream!"

