The careful American scripting of the dramatic statements made at Aqaba
last week by prime ministers Sharon                             and
Abbas                          , coupled with President Bush's
                         own firmly worded commitment, point to
Washington's newfound determination to deal energetically with the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Bush, in particular, has in the course of the past month exhibited an
emotional commitment to the cause of Middle East peace that is difficult
to explain without reference to the president's deep felt religious
beliefs.

Many Middle East actors appear to be inspired by strong religious
beliefs. Many exercise negative influence--for example, the Islamic
extremists in Iran, the Islamist terrorist organizations, the American
Christian evangelicals who support the Israeli settlement movement, and
the religious settlers themselves. When Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat
recently incited Palestinian children to grow up to be martyrs, he too
was, not for the first time, imposing extremist Islamist beliefs on the
conflict. On the other hand, religious extremists are not the only
negative actors in the region: witness the legacy of the secular
Bathists in Iraq and Syria.

Still, it is not often that an American president tells an Arab leader,
as President Bush did last summer, that in pursuing Iraqi leader Saddam
Hussein he has "a mission from God." Now Bush appears to address the
challenge of providing freedom and democracy for the Palestinian people
in somewhat similar religious ideological terms. There is also a
personal angle: after Iraq the American president appears to have
greater self-assurance and confidence in his international role.

But there are also some hardheaded calculations of realpolitik behind
the Bush administration's newfound devotion to the roadmap and its
putative end product.

The first consideration is Iraq. Assessments may differ as to
Washington's chances of making good on its promise to democratize Iraq.
But as long as the US is there--whether bogged down in internecine
fighting, terrorism and meddling by neighbors, or on the road to
stabilizing the country--it appears to have concluded that it must
demonstrate active involvement on the Israeli-Palestinian front in order
to deflect Arab criticism and buy regional good will.

A second consideration is global. The administration's war in Iraq split
the Atlantic alliance and undermined the position of traditional allies
like England and Turkey, where public opinion faulted governmental
inclinations to join with the US. A concerted effort at peacemaking in
the Israeli-Palestinian sphere answers the need to make amends.

A third consideration is domestic. Private inside polling by the
Republicans indicates that the American public will support involvement
by Bush, at least up to a point. The American public has little patience
with Israeli settlements and wants Israeli Prime Minister Sharon to take
peace initiatives. Some sectors of the American Jewish mainstream have
begun to express open disagreement with the hard line evinced by the
American-Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) and the Conference of
Presidents. Bush, who told that same Arab leader last summer that he had
little to risk in getting involved with the Palestinian issue since he
gained only nine percent of the Jewish vote in 2000 and could hardly do
worse next time, may conceivably now perceive an opportunity to increase
his popularity with Jewish voters.

Finally this was, after all, "the plan." Key administration thinkers
like Paul Wolfowitz and Condoleezza Rice long intended to exploit the
victory in Iraq to try to end the Israeli-Palestinian bloodletting. Nor,
despite all the rhetoric about being "with us or against us," could the
administration ignore the need to win over the hearts and minds of the
Muslim world in the post-9/11 era.

Yet the president's newfound enthusiasm for this enterprise is almost
certain to be constrained by heavy counter-considerations. Bush's Middle
East campaign could easily be shelved if Abbas proves unable to grasp
the initiative and lead a successful campaign against Palestinian
violence; if Sharon balks at dismantling and freezing settlements and/or
if pressure on him precipitates an Israeli governmental and electoral
crisis; if regional Arab leaders prove less than forthcoming in
rewarding Israel for concessions by expanding relations; and when--not
if--the American presidential elections gear up to a point where
pressure on Sharon, or merely the threat of failure, forces Bush to give
priority to his next Florida campaign.

Bush clearly lacks what might be called a "sophisticated" grasp of the
Israel-Arab conflict--indeed, of world affairs in general. Some might
argue that a president who is on a mission from God and who can't
pronounce "contiguous" has no business messing with the Palestinian
issue. On the other hand, President Clinton's grasp of the minutiae of
the conflict was also no guarantee of success. Ronald Reagan, whose wife
believed in astrology, helped bring down the "Evil Empire" and end the
Cold War with a simplicity of approach and single-minded determination
reminiscent of Bush.

The nature of the leadership on both the Israeli and the Palestinian
sides remains even more problematic. Abu Mazen's heart is in the right
place, but he has little public support and is constrained by extremists
from Arafat to Hamas. Sharon, in the best case, is not really committed
to the kind of final status territorial settlement that Abu Mazen, and
apparently Bush, champion. Hence the single most important contribution
that can now be made by friends of Middle East peace--the rest of the
Quartet, the moderate Arab states, American Jewish leaders--is to keep
Bush in the game.

