In recent years the interaction between the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
and the rule of law has produced two phenomena that are central to any
eventual peaceful resolution.

First is a Palestinian paradox. Here we have an increasingly lawless
society that has largely failed to build and maintain functioning court
and police systems. Its legally elected leader is seen as a Mafioso thug
by the entire world, now including most Arab states. Its latest minister
of justice, Nahed Al Reyes, just threatened to resign in protest at the
legal situation.

Yet this failed regime in a failed proto-state is able to persuade the
international community that international law is on its side.

Last month's International Court of Justice opinion on the fence and the
United Nations General Assembly recommendation to embrace that opinion
are the most recent examples. At a broader level, the international
acceptance of one-sided Palestinian interpretations of UN General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions such as 194 and 242 also bears
witness to Palestinian and general Arab success in recruiting
international law to the Palestinian cause.

One reason for this paradoxical Palestinian success is Israel's
inclination to abdicate any role in arguing the legal aspects of the
Palestinian case in international forums. Not only did Israel not
present its case to the ICJ in The Hague, for decades it has allowed
Palestinian interpretations of relevant UN resolutions to go practically
unchallenged, to the point where they are generally accepted by the
world. How many informed international observers know that a "right of
return" is not even specifically mentioned in 194-which, incidentally,
the entire Arab contingent to the UN voted against in 1949-or that 242
does not mention Palestinians and was not intended to deal with their
conflict with Israel?

We in Israel are apparently so certain that the world is against us that
we withdraw from the international legal arena even when we have a good
case.

This brings us to the second phenomenon, an Israeli challenge regarding
the rule of law. The issue is the settlements. The Israel High Court of
Justice has acquiesced in the policy of a long series of Israeli
governments regarding the exclusive use of public or crown lands in the
West Bank and Gaza for Jewish settlement purposes rather than for the
welfare of the Arab residents. This constitutes a blot on an otherwise
exemplary court record of upholding the rule of law. Now we finally have
a prime minister who appears to be determined to begin dismantling
settlements-an absolute prerequisite to any attempt to implement a two
state solution and thereby maintain Israel as a Jewish and a democratic
state. Assuming he can create and maintain a governing coalition
dedicated to disengagement, Israel faces the efforts of a determined
minority, the religious-ideological settlers, to deter and intimidate
the government and its security forces and prevent removal of the
settlements-sometimes using legal means, but in other cases resorting to
violence. The settlers' behavior in confronting government attempts to
remove outposts is a harbinger of things to come.

Like many countries, Israel has its problems with the rule of law. We
have underworld bosses, trade in drugs and prostitutes, gangs in low
income neighborhoods, wife-beaters, white collar crime, and not enough
police. We also have very specific problems regarding the rule of law
under conditions of occupation and warfare in the territories: as IDF
Chief of Staff Moshe Yaalon notes, roadblocks and the destruction of
houses "don't look good"; nor do accidental deaths of Palestinian
civilians. Yet these are the inevitable wages of war; look at the US
occupation of Iraq. Israel may have long ago lost the title of
"enlightened occupier", but in military legal terms its behavior is no
worse than that of other occupiers. The real problem is political and
strategic-the occupation-and not the specific application or abuse by
Israel of laws in the territories.

Except for the settlement issue. This is where international rule of law
meets Israeli rule of law. True, the way things are going the state
created on the land vacated by the settlers is liable to be a lawless
Palestine. But a non-democratic Israel-incapable of disentangling itself
from a huge Palestinian population yet denying the Palestinians basic
rights-will by definition be a lawless Israel.

