Q: What is your opinion on Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon's plan to evacuate the Gaza Strip settlements?

A: First of all, we will not oppose the evacuation of any
settlement. Therefore, we see any evacuation as part of an Israeli
withdrawal from the occupied Palestinian Territories. However, there is
a difference between leaving settlements and that having a positive
effect on the ground. We believe that Sharon is trying to kill the
roadmap which was adopted by the United States, the Quartet, and the
international community, and to implement an alternative plan in the
region which is from a purely Israeli perspective. This is part and
parcel with the Israeli plan of "separation" from the Palestinians; yet
another example of unilateral Israeli measures.

Sharon is trying to transform Gaza into a ghetto by evacuating some
settlements. Remember, the Sharon proposal goes for only 17 settlements
out of a total of 21 in the Gaza Strip. Therefore, the proposed
evacuations will have no political value since four settlements will
remain in the Strip. It is clear that these moves cannot be seen as a
political evacuation, but a security one. For Sharon proposes
"relocating" some of the settlers from Gaza to settlements in the West
Bank. You can say he wants to leave through the door in Gaza and enter
through the window of the West Bank. It's just moving from one occupied
Palestinian land to another.

We feel that Sharon's plan is dangerous because he is trying to sidestep
both international legitimacy and the roadmap. These are attempts to
impose the status quo on the Palestinians by locking them within
enclaves, whether in the West Bank or in the Gaza Strip. By doing so, he
is sending the message that the Palestinians are a people who do not
deserve a state. These steps would abort the chances of creating a
Palestinian state in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip and will have many
dangerous repercussions.

Q: What sort of dangerous repercussions?

A: First, this would open the door to the continuation of
the brutal conflict between our two peoples for generations to come. It
is well known that there are different solutions to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. One is based on the two-state solution.
The second is based on one, bi-national state. The third is based on
conflict, the removal of one or the other people. The separation wall
precludes the creation of a viable and independent Palestinian state.
That leaves us with the two remaining possibilities and we know that
Sharon doesn't want a bi-national state. Therefore, this opens the door
to a conflict which will last for a very long time. This conflict will
also reinforce the ideology of the radical Islamic elements within
Palestinian society who also says that conflict and war are legitimate
solutions. Sharon is trying to force the Palestinians to choose the
option of conflict instead of choosing peace through the two-state
solution. This is very dangerous.

Q: Do you believe that the Palestinians Authority is
currently capable of taking control of the Gaza Strip?

A: Look, the situation in the Gaza Strip is very difficult.
Gaza is a ghetto, besieged and destroyed. We don't really have any
security services in Gaza. Some were completely destroyed, and what
remains are simply individuals or disconnected groupings, some of which
are contradictory. This obviously has negative repercussions on the
security situation in Gaza.

Q: Does the PA have complete control over Gaza?

A: From a professional perspective, no. The Palestinian
Authority does not have the means to control the entire Gaza Strip at
this time. This only reinforces the position of the Islamic groups
there. Israel bears responsibility for the destruction of the security
infrastructure in Gaza and for the deteriorating situation. I can say
that if the status quo is prolonged, there are many doubts if the PA can
assume responsibility for the Strip in the near future.

Q: So what are you doing to counterbalance the weakness
of the PA?

A: Right now we are relying on the Fatah Movement as the
alternative to the destroyed Palestinian security forces. Therefore the
situation is quite precarious. If the siege of Gaza is not lifted, and
the PA is not given the opportunity to impose its authority in an
effective manner, then I am pretty sure that Gaza will be transformed
from a ghetto into a jungle.

Q: Do you believe that an Israeli withdrawal from Gaza
will lead to the strengthening of Hamas since it sees itself as an
alternative to the PA?

A: I want to clearly state that we are in favor of Israel
withdrawing from any inch of occupied Palestinian territory. If we have
the choice of and Israeli presence or Hamas in Gaza, of course we would
choose Hamas or any other Palestinian faction. But this depends on the
way that Israel withdraws from Gaza and their aims. It depends on the PA
having the opportunity to assert its authority and Israeli cooperation
with the PA. If Israel withdraws in an abrupt fashion and without any
prior coordination with the PA, this will surely help Hamas. But it
appears that Sharon wants to destroy the PA and had no need for the
Palestinian Authority. He wants there to be civil strife which leads to
a civil war in Gaza. A withdrawal based on bad intentions and without
coordination with the PA will transform Gaza into a living hell.

Q: If you could address the Israeli public and policy
makers directly, what would you say to them?

A: I would tell them there is no alternative for the two
peoples other than the return to the negotiating table. There is no
choice but to live together peacefully on this land. We know that there
is no military solution because Israel has tried unsuccessfully with all
its weapons to crush the Palestinian people. They cannot force the
Palestinians to surrender. All these unilateral measures will fail in
the end. The Israeli people must take responsibility and put an end to
these policies aimed at humiliating and oppressing the Palestinian
people. Israelis must reject the imposition of any security solution to
the conflict and strive towards a fair and just political one for the
good of the coming generations. We both need a political resolution
based on the right of Palestinians to an independent state in the West
Bank and Gaza with Jerusalem the capital of both states.

