There is a direct connection between the approaching American offensive
in Iraq and the penetrating Egyptian diplomatic intervention in the
violent Israeli-Palestinian confrontation that began some 30 months ago.
Egypt has attempted to compel the Palestinian factions involved in
terrorism against Israel to cease their fire, unilaterally and without
any linkage with Israel's actions.

The architect of this Egyptian move is the director of General
Intelligence, General Omar Suleiman, who of course received the
blessings of President Mubarak. General Suleiman, one of the most
influential personalities on the Egyptian scene, presented Mubarak with
three primary reasons that obligate Egypt to intervene in the conflict
at this juncture. All are linked with the approaching war in the Gulf.

First, the United States is about to take action in the Gulf and Egypt,
as an ally, must help out at this time by calming down the
Israeli-Palestinian arena. Secondly, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
is liable to take advantage of the offensive in Iraq to step up military
activities against the Palestinians, thereby rendering a possible future
solution all the more difficult. And third, an Israeli-Palestinian
escalation during a war in Iraq is liable to have a negative effect on
Egypt and incite the "street" to demonstrate against the regime.

Initially Suleiman tried to engage Israel as well in his initiative. In
a meeting with Prime Minister Sharon, the Egyptian general asked for a
commitment that if the Palestinians ended terrorist attacks, Israel
would reciprocate by ceasing to attack Palestinian terrorist activists.
Israel's reply: first let them stop, afterwards we'll see.

Interestingly, even after Israel refused to commit itself, the Egyptians
decided to pursue their initiative unilaterally. They reasoned that if
the Palestinians do indeed cease their fire, Israel will not be able to
justify to world opinion its ongoing military activity for long, and
will be obliged to cease fire as well.

The Cairo talks took place in a civilian facility that belongs to
Egyptian Intelligence. In one of the first meetings involving
representatives of the main Palestinian factions, General Suleiman
demanded that they sign a commitment to a full and unconditional
ceasefire (hudna) in both the occupied territories and inside the Green
Line for an entire year. In corridor conversations, the Egyptians
signaled that they would suffice with half a year.

The Egyptians pressured Arafat vigorously before he approved the final
version, and invoked additional pressure to get him to permit Abu Maazen
(Mahmoud Abbas), a very senior leader of the Palestine Liberation
Organization, to go to Cairo as head of the Fateh delegation. Hamas,
which opposed the hudna idea from the start, fell back on a series of
delaying tactics in order to avoid confrontation with the Egyptians:
once the Hamas leadership sent a very junior representative rather than
sending a senior figure like Khaled Mashal, head of their Political
Bureau. And once they were absent from the meetings to protest the
Egyptians' failure to invite "all the Palestinian organizations."

The Egyptians spared no effort in bending Hamas to their will. Mubarak
addressed Syrian President Assad and asked that he pressure Hamas to
send Mashal to Cairo. General Suleiman informed the Hamas delegates
unequivocally that if they refused to sign, Cairo would from herein
consider them "enemies of the peace process."

But Hamas did not bend, and the Cairo talks were stuck. Last week the
participants disbanded without issuing a joint statement. They spoke
vaguely about continuing to meet at an unspecified later date.

Iran is to some extent responsible for the tough stance taken by Hamas.
But the main reason is the organization's perception that it currently
enjoys broad support on the Palestinian street for its demand to
continue the suicide bombings. This view was clearly reflected in
comments made at the end of last week by Mahmoud a-Zahar, a senior Hamas
official, to the effect that the organization is prepared in every way
to replace the Palestinian Authority as leader of the Palestinian people.

If the failure of the Cairo talks produced any benefit, it may lie in
the realization on the part of the moderate elements within Fateh that
Hamas' policy of ongoing terrorist attacks reflects not only that
group's permanent strategy against Israel, but also a means of gaining
the upper hand in the struggle for leadership of the Palestinian people.
A few attempts by Fateh operatives in the Gaza Strip in recent days to
confront Hamas and stop the firing of mortars and launching of Qasam
rockets against Israeli settlements may indicate that this awakening is
an ongoing affair.

