The recent Israeli government decision to begin building extensive walls
around Palestinians is just one more example of how Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon is unable to deal with Israeli problems save
through his narrow security vision. Sharon is blind to the political
dimensions of the ongoing violence and is therefore unwilling to engage
in a political process. Unfortunately, serious political talks are the
only way out of the current conflict, a struggle that has been terribly
costly for both Palestinians and Israelis.

Indeed, Sharon seems to have forgotten the historic failure of fences
and walls--there is not a single example in which divisions like these
have been able to stop those bent on getting past them. Most recent, but
not most insignificant is the example of the Berlin Wall, which not only
fell after time, but was porous even at its mightiest.

Besides lacking vision, Sharon's approach is terribly dangerous. It can
only be seen as an integral part of a comprehensive strategy pursued by
this Israeli government and one likely to be promoted by Sharon in his
coming trip to the United States. That strategy is to gradually divide
the West Bank and Gaza Strip into isolated population centers. This will
have a dramatic effect on geography and society and the
already-disintegrating Palestinian economy.

Further, while attention is focused on the dramatic events of these
confrontations, the Israeli government is adding to the single greatest
threat to prospects for peace: the settlements. At the same time that
Palestinians are being blocked into specific areas, the settlements are
sprouting up and being used by the Israeli government as a tool for
further shattering the Palestinian territories into pieces. One must be
careful not to misunderstand the implications of these new walls and
fences. It is not simply that Israel is creating barriers along its
borders, but rather that these fences are part of a policy of creating
what Israelis call a "buffer zone." These areas of heightened Israeli
control in the occupied Palestinian territories cut deep wedges out of
the West Bank, at places taking 10-kilometer-deep chunks out of its
narrowest places, a waistline that measures no more that 50 kilometers
at times. All of these new elements undertaken in the name of security
actually systematically undermine the basis for the peace process, i.e.
historic territorial compromise on the basis of the 1967 borders as
mentioned in United Nations Security Council Resolution 242.

This effect is complemented by the gradual but methodical practices of
the Israeli army to undermine the Palestinian Authority and cancel out
Palestinian control over any Palestinian land, leaving the Authority
with only an administrative role to fill a completely impossible
mandate. The reasons for this systematic unraveling of these
understandings of peace are the ideological beliefs of Sharon and his
allies. Theirs is an ideology based on religion and history and power
politics, where all of historic Palestine is Israel's birthright
according to religion, and where the only way to achieve this is by
force (and, when force doesn't work, more force).

Too, there is a deep racism that lies behind the strategy of walls and
fences preventing movement in only one direction and confining only
Palestinians, when Israeli settlers and the army are permitted to move
both directions at will. The building of these barriers can only deepen
the injustice of Palestinian daily life, making the most basic tasks and
joys more difficult, and as a result inspiring increasing hatred and
violence and counter-violence.

The sum effect of these actions will be bad news for the more than half
of Israeli society that continues to support a withdrawal from territory
and the settlements as part of a peaceful compromise. On the other hand,
the transformation of this conflict into an existential battle with no
space for a middle ground will only satisfy extremists on both
sides.

