Q: At a time when Israel's military penetration into the Gaza
Strip is escalating and Abu Maazen is likely to be chosen prime minister
of the Palestinian Authority, are we in fact witnessing the victory of
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's strategy of scoring a decisive military
victory and forcing the Palestinians to change their leadership?

A: In the conditions of uncertainty that characterize the Middle
East, we cannot know what will happen in the long term, hence can deal
only with tactics. Therefore Sharon does not in fact have a strategy.
But we can credit him with the success of implanting the recognition
that the Palestinian leadership must be reformed. Clearly it never
crossed the mind of [Palestinian leader Yasir] Arafat that he needed to
appoint a prime minister; he has bowed to pressure. Our penetrations of
Gaza are also a tactic--to put a stop to the firing of Qassam
rockets--and not a strategy.

Q: You support a purely military solution to terrorism.
Sharon integrates a political element. Do you disagree with his path?

A: There is no possibility for substantive negotiations prior to the
suppression of terrorism. Sharon was late in implementing a military
solution. He should have begun following the Dolphinarium attack (summer
2001). In the beginning his steps were hesitant and he held that
"restraint is strength," but in general he is acting correctly now. It
was a matter of a learning curve in the face of a new kind of terrorism.

Q: There are disagreements between the Likud (and within the
Likud) and the National Religious Party and National Union, over
Sharon's peace policy and the objective of establishing a Palestinian
state. Under these circumstances can the new government succeed?

A: In my view the government is very stable. The law limiting the
possibility of raising no-confidence motions enhances stability, and
there is every likelihood that this government will last out its days.
As for disagreements, the important thing is the public's overwhelming
decision in favor of the Likud, which is unprecedented in Israeli
elections. Thus politically Sharon is in a very strong position
vis-a-vis past situations where the prime minister's party was a
minority within the government.

Clearly there is no unanimity within the government over the Palestinian
issue. But Sharon's long-term vision of a Palestinian state at the end
of the process is not worth much and I see little purpose in this talk.
The real challenge is terrorism, and on this issue the government is
united.

Q: According to the roadmap and President Bush's June 24,
2002 speech, a Palestinian state will be established before the end of
2003.

A: If Bush hopes that terrorism will end during 2003, so do I. But
I'm not certain this will happen. In the foreseeable future we will not
reach a crossroads of political decision, because in the Middle East
developments are very slow, painfully slow.

Q: In your view is the Sharon vision, according to which in
the second phase of the roadmap a Palestinian state will be established
without final borders in about 50 percent of the territory and for a
period of about 15 years, a viable vision?

A: It's difficult to deal with this issue; we're very far from such
a solution that ends the conflict.

Q: The Shinui Party does not embrace the political solution
of the Israeli right. Is it the weak link in this government? Will it
register sufficient "secular" achievements in a government in which not
a few oppose its line?

A: Shinui is a single-issue party and they will stick to this issue.
I don't see them leaving the government over an academic/hypothetical
issue. My advice to Shinui is: you won't have a better opportunity to
fulfill your single issue platform outside of this government.

