Q: What will be the political program of this Palestinian
cabinet?

A: The ministers' first tasks are establishing a policy to
confront the segregation wall, the settlements and the Judaization of
Jerusalem. Then they must make reforms to get to the point of
presidential, Legislative Council and municipal elections as soon as
possible, and to continue as much as possible with determining a
development policy, despite occupation conditions.

Q: How do you intend to respond to the separation wall?

A: A new strategy must be established in order to expose this
Israeli settlement policy and to enlist the world and the Arabs to
pressure Israel to put a stop to the wall. It must occupy a broad space
in the media and in popular activities, as well as support the citizens
living in the wall region and those who have been recently harmed by it.

Q: What will be the difference between this government and
its predecessor headed by Mahmoud Abbas?

A: In program, there are no significant differences. The
difference is perhaps over the issue of the interior [minister] that has
been resolved by keeping security in the hands of the Higher Security
Council, which is headed by the president and represents all the leading
factions. This is a new formula and perhaps handling the issue [of
security] will be easier when the president himself is in the picture.

Q: Do you believe that the Legislative Council will approve
the cabinet selections?

A: Nothing is guaranteed. The Legislative Council may approve
it--or may not. If there is broad participation, the government will
attain the council's vote of confidence. If there are comments [to be
made] on the government program and budgeting issues for next year--but I
must remind you that recently the atmosphere has been one that assists
the government in gaining a vote of confidence.

Q: How will the government handle the issue of security in
light of American pressure?

Q: I think that there is an exaggeration of the issue of
security that originates outside and is imposed on the Palestinian
street. Israel is disseminating this [view] and the United States and
the international community have adopted it in an attempt to focus first
on security.

However, the first problem is not security, but the existence of
occupation. There are no policies [at work] that offer Palestinians the
hope of a political solution. I believe Palestinians are ready to
compromise and to honor the agreements and provide the security demanded
of them. However, if we go back to the old-new story of "security
first", then we must determine whether one has done enough concerning
security--only then will [Israel] think of easing measures and
reconsider the wall and the settlements.

This standard has proven to fail; it will not succeed today or tomorrow.
If security is not joined to the political issues and with restoring an
obvious political track that gives Palestinians guarantees for escaping
the suffering they live in, nothing in the security arena will change
and no Palestinian government will be able to change it, because this is
something that we do not control.

How can they [Israel] demand security from us, when they invade Jenin
and Rafah daily? If they were to halt their aggression and withdraw from
the cities and reconsidered the security issue, then the Palestinians
would have something to protect in the [resulting] relative sovereignty
of the Palestinian population. The experience of Bethlehem is an
example: since the Israeli withdrawal, not one security incident has
occurred. This is proof that if Israel were to withdraw from the West
Bank and Gaza, stop killing Palestinians, and [stop] its aggressive
policies, the Palestinian Authority would be able to preserve security.

Q: When does the Palestinian Authority become unfeasible as
an agent of the two-state solution in light of the Israeli settlement
policy?

A: The potential [for independence] lives on in the Palestinian
people on their land, and thus they maintain the international
legitimacy for self-determination with which to establish their state
and acquire sovereignty and independence once the occupation is removed.
The Israelis will not attain normal economic and security conditions
until they deal with the Palestinian issue in seriousness. This is what
we rely on as we search for new people who believe in peace to come to
power in Israel, those who believe in returning to the June 4 borders
and granting Palestinians a state in order to achieve peace and
security. There is still hope.

Q: What are your expectations for the future?

A: As long as the occupation and the aggression against our
people goes on, there will be uprisings from our side against this
occupation, and resistance in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. There will
be undesired retaliations. The last operation in Haifa (which we were
opposed to) initiated in Jenin, which has been occupied for more than a
year and a half. No one can throw the responsibility for security at the
Palestinians, since it doesn't reside there.

Q: There seem to be some new faces among the ministers
representing Fateh on the cabinet.

A: If a referendum were to be carried out in the Palestinian
street, the vacuum to be filled by new faces [in the cabinet] would be
wide. The current change, in fact, is small. I would not call this a
generational struggle, but a natural process of regeneration. To resolve
this internal issue, we must return to holding movement conferences and
conduct an election in the bodies of Fateh to elect [new] leadership or
reelect the current leadership. Democracy and elections would revive
this movement.

