The Israeli elections of January 28 constituted a focal point for two
significant unilateral initiatives, one Arab, one Israeli. Ostensibly,
both failed. In fact, at least on the Israeli side, the elections
actually provided grounds for guarded optimism.

The Arab initiative was an attempt by Egypt to bring about a unilateral
Palestinian ceasefire and then to seek Israeli reciprocation. Three
months of intermittent talks in Cairo that involved up to 12 diverse
Palestinian organizations ended in disarray on Israeli election day. In
the final analysis, Hamas rejected a one-sided ceasefire, and refused to
end anti-Israel violence in the West Bank and Gaza. Heavy Palestinian
losses caused by Israeli military actions further soured the atmosphere.

The Cairo talks are scheduled to be renewed later this month.
Conceivably contacts with Palestinian leaders initiated by Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon may contribute to a limited success. The chances
are slim, but the Cairo talks have highlighted the strong desire of a
wide variety of Palestinian leaders, local and national, to take matters
into their own hands and end the violence.

The Israeli initiative for unilateral redeployment represents a very
different case. It was championed by Amram Mitzna, leader of the Labor
Party, who lost the election. Yet the cause of unilateral redeployment
did not lose.

It was then Prime Minister Ehud Barak who first put this issue on the
public agenda, when he suggested that failure of the Oslo process,
culminating at Camp David in July 2000, should precipitate a readiness
on the part of the Israeli public to withdraw to temporary borders and
dismantle the settlements beyond them, in order to rescue Israel from a
demographic disaster if it continued to rule directly or indirectly over
3.5 million Palestinians. In the course of the ensuing two years a
number of organizations and research institutions in Israel embraced the
idea, led by the Council for Peace and Security and the Van Leer
Institute. The wave of Palestinian suicide bombings focused attention on
the idea of a fence, on or near the Green Line, to delineate a new
security border. By early 2002 the entire concept--fence, redeployment
and dismantling settlements--was gaining the support of a majority of
the Israeli public, in poll after poll.

Prime Minister Sharon, determined to preserve and even expand the
settlements that have contributed so heavily to Israel's security and
demographic dilemma, rejected the idea of unilateral redeployment and
only reluctantly embraced the fence project. Mitzna embraced both and
announced his candidacy to lead Labor. Within a few months he had forced
Labor to leave the unity government and replaced Fuad Ben Eliezer as
party head.

Mitzna lost the elections, and lost them badly. But not because of the
unilateral redeployment issue. His campaign proposal that Israel
withdraw from the Gaza Strip within a year was never attacked by Sharon,
because it was popular. His attacks on Sharon's foot-dragging regarding
the fence forced Sharon to pledge to accelerate work on that project.

Rather, Mitzna hopelessly muddled his election message by also
advocating unconditional renewal of negotiations with the current
Palestinian leadership--a very unpopular idea with the electorate--and
attacking Sharon needlessly on issues like decisionmaking where he is
considered strong. Besides, it was almost a foregone conclusion that he
could not quickly become well known to the public and repair the damage
done to Labor's image by Barak's negotiating mistakes and two years of
Ben Eliezer and Peres' rubber-stamping of Sharon's policy decisions.

Sharon's victory, the readiness of Egyptian President Mubarak and
Palestinian leaders to meet with him, and the anticipation in some
circles of regionally moderating side effects from the coming war
against Iraq tend to feed speculation that Sharon will soon succeed in
removing Arafat and leading a genuine peace process. The likelihood of
this happening is close to nil. Neither Sharon nor US President Bush has
a genuine strategy for peace between Israelis and Palestinians. Neither
does Arafat--yet that does not mean that removing him from power will
improve the situation.

This takes us back to the Israeli and Arab unilateral initiatives. They
are in effect the only games in town, and they target the two most
intractable issues: Israeli occupation and settlements on the one hand,
and Palestinian violence on the other. At least these ideas, with all
their undoubted weaknesses and pitfalls, require consensus and political
determination on one side only.

Mitzna's election campaign, however problematic, placed the idea of
unilateral redeployment and dismantling of settlements squarely at the
center of the Israeli public debate. If the Israeli parliamentary
opposition learns lessons wisely from this defeat, it will now focus
exclusively on this issue.

