Q: What was your impression of the Cairo talks between the
Palestinian factions?

A: In general, they were positive because this is the first time for
many years that there have been frank and honest talks around the main
ideas--not just the usual matters, but the main positions of the various
factions. For example, discussion of the political lines and ideological
programs of the factions was significant and frank. It was the first
time that the groups discussed the duties and differences between them.
It was important, but not extensive enough, and there should be more
talks in the future.

During the dialogue, the continuation of the Israeli aggression against
the Palestinians and areas under Palestinian control (in the days of the
dialogue, there were repeated clashes) created an increasingly complex
atmosphere for the factions that were involved in the discussion and
study. Indeed, perhaps an indirect cause and major contributor to the
failure [of consensus] over some of the issues was the Israeli escalation.

Q: What were the major obstacles to an agreement?

A: The factional representatives that were there and the main
subjects in the dialogue concentrated on three subjects: transforming
the political vision of this intifada, transforming the tactics and
forms of the struggle with Israel, and third, transforming to a
Palestinian national unity government and fixing the Palestinian house
and our internal Palestinian relationships. These three subjects held
the greatest possibility of frank dialogue, like I said, and it may have
been possible to reach agreement over them.

Directly and indirectly, there was partial agreement on the issue of
targeting civilians, that civilians are not part of the strategy of the
Palestinian struggle. That was one of the most important things we were
discussing. Of course, there was no final agreement, but this remained
the most important issue and there was partial consensus that the
targeting of civilians is not part of the Palestinian strategy. The
Palestinians want to neutralize the issue of civilians, to remove them
from the struggle, and to make this a Palestinian and Israeli obligation
with international supervision.

Q: Did some of the discussion focus on pressure from outside
parties, such as from the Egyptians or Europeans?

A: No, there was no visible direct interference from the Egyptian
government, but there was situational pressure, let us say. This came
out of the complex circumstances facing the region; the chances of an
aggression against Iraq; American control of international affairs and
the strategic alliance between Israel and the United States regarding
all of the ongoing events in the Middle East region.

All of this put indirect pressure on the dialogue, not to mention the
official Arab position and the many difficulties in the Arab-Palestinian
relationship. The fact is that the European position is also influenced
by, or to a certain degree follows, the American position. Also, there
was concern expressed at the dialogue over the strength of the Israeli
right wing, and its racist policies. These were the situational
pressures, but there was no direct pressure [from governments].

Q: What do you think is the importance of unilateral moves
like this, from either the Israeli or Palestinian side?

A: Recently, there have been statements from the Israeli side
indicating that the Israelis want to plant in the Palestinian
consciousness that the resistance and the intifada cannot lead to a
political solution. Of course, we don't agree with this at all; the
Palestinian people want to continue with the intifada. And it is
important that they [Israel] understand that given their force and
control and given their destruction of the peace process, they are not
going to get their security. There needs to be a true renewal of the
peace process and discussion and internal change.

