For some time now, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has been heading
towards dramatic change. Three major players have had a hand in
increasingly clear trends of behavior that lay bare their respective
strategies. Hamas and other Islamic militant movements have upped their
profile, in particular when Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon gave
them the deciding vote over the peace process by deciding not to resume
negotiations until Islamists stopped their violent activities. Hamas, in
exercising its veto over negotiations, has three major objectives: to
increase its public support, to undermine the Palestinian Authority and
the peace process; and finally, to transform the conflict from one over
ending the Israeli occupation into a conflict over existence.

The irony is that these are the same objectives held by the current
Israeli government, which--like Hamas--represents the extremists and
those who oppose the peace process on the Israeli side. Dismantling the
Palestinian Authority, as well as invalidating areas that the peace
process put under Palestinian control, is the heart of the strategy of
Sharon, who sat in opposition to the peace process while leaders in
Israel and Palestine were busy creating it. Ideologically and
politically, Sharon has always opposed the kind of territorial
compromise that would allow the existence of two states. His politics
are those of the zero sum game and the existential questions that make
this conflict irresolvable.

In addition, Sharon, like Hamas, has been working to maintain his public
support by pulling the rug out of his competitor Benjamin Netanyahu who
is campaigning against the prime minister by testing Sharon's resolve
over destroying the Palestinian Authority.

As such, we are now in a position in which the Palestinian extremist
opposition and the Israeli government headed by Sharon are both doing
their best to undermine the Palestinian Authority and its leader. The
activities of each are reinforcing the other.

Palestinian President Yasser Arafat, in turn, is very transparent to his
public, while seemingly very confusing to outsiders, including American
and European officials. No matter what Israelis hypothesize, it remains
clear to Palestinians that Arafat's strategy is exactly what he says it
is: producing an end to the Israeli occupation, a state with the borders
delineated in United Nations Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338
and a just solution for the refugee problem in accordance with United
Nations Resolutions 194.

Over the last ten years, Arafat chose the peace process as the means of
attaining those goals, so much so that Arafat abandoned all of his other
options and concentrated on negotiations. But after the collapse of the
Camp David talks and the subsequent peace process failure, Arafat lost
that option. The Palestinian leader was not in a position to allow a
political vacuum at that point, because "coexisting" in the status quo
with no peace process was tantamount to the defacto acceptance of the
Israeli occupation. To allow that would mean the end of Arafat's
cause--and subsequently the end of Arafat's political career.

That is why when Israel transferred the relationship between the two
sides from peace negotiations to confrontations, provocatively allowing
Sharon to visit the Al Aqsa Mosque and then killing with snipers an
average of ten Palestinian stone-throwing demonstrators a day with
almost no casualties on the other side, at that point, the
confrontations became Arafat's only choice. He did not stop the uprising
then, in particular because if he had stood against it, Hamas would have
monopolized the Palestinian street, which was swept up in the rage of
the Intifada.

At this moment, Arafat's immediate concerns are straightforward. First,
he wants to maintain what are considered to be the Palestinian
achievements of the peace process, i.e. the Palestinian Authority and
its control over certain parts of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. In this,
he seems to be facing both the Israeli government and the Palestinian
opposition. Arafat's strategy, therefore, is to emphasize the only
apparent disagreement between Israel and the United States--one over the
extent of the regional impact if Arafat falls from his position as a
cornerstone to a peaceful Middle East.

Arafat knows that he has always represented and remains to this day the
most moderate strain among Palestinians. He is not very concerned about
internal challenges to his power, since he has benefited from a
long-standing policy of not allowing others the influence that might

More and more, Arafat's future seems to hinge on the question of whether
the world--including the Arab world--is willing to accept the unintended
and unholy Israeli and Palestinian extremist alliance against
him.

