The single common denominator between the unilateral approaches cropping
up among Palestinians and Israelis is their demonstration of the failure
of mutuality, which is the normal way for any two parties to solve
disputes.

For Palestinians, this go-it-alone attitude is an expression of
frustration. But Israelis acting unilaterally, on the other hand, seem
to be trying to force their negotiating position down the Palestinians'
throats. Some Israelis have diverted efforts towards a compromise into
thinking alone, deciding alone and then trying to implement that vision
entirely single-handedly.

The problem with the Israeli unilateral approach is that when the
stronger party tries to impose a solution or arrangements that take into
consideration only its own needs and requirements, this almost always
comes at the expense of the needs of the weaker Palestinian side. In the
practical sense, it might make Israelis feel less vulnerable to
construct a wall or withdraw from some of the occupied territories
(notably not all) but there is no reason to believe that this lessened
fear will bring Israelis and Palestinians closer to the final,
comprehensive and lasting peace that the majority of our publics crave.
Indeed, by further isolating Palestinians from Israelis, the Israeli
public can be expected to grow less understanding of the Palestinian
bottom line.

For these reasons, Palestinians have generally criticized Israeli
unilateralist ideas. But after finding it impossible to reach a mutual
ceasefire agreement in cooperation with Israel, Palestinians are
resorting to the same approach: trying to reach factional agreement over
a unilateral ceasefire that will show up Israel as the violent
instigator before the international community. That unilateral ceasefire
is not very likely to be the subject of consensus among Palestinians
and, if it is, will have limited chance of successfully inviting Israeli
reciprocation.

As such, the unilateral Palestinian ceasefire is as unlikely as Israeli
unilateralism to result in meaningful peacemaking. As long as the other
side continues with its policies of maintaining and consolidating the
occupation by force and violence, then this will be enough to guarantee
replication of violent Palestinian reactions. Indeed, the price paid for
trying to prevent the violent resistance will likely be the
transformation of the violence from Israeli-Palestinian to
inter-Palestinian.

Nor does the general trend towards unilateral moves enjoy parallel
support among the Israeli and Palestinian publics. The trend is not
deep-rooted; as soon as there is a shift allowing the resumption of the
negotiations between the two sides, both parties can be expected to drop
their unilateral initiatives and return to supporting the natural path
to peace: negotiations, mutuality and reciprocation.

I continue to believe that a mutually-conceived peace is not impossible
if the two sides stick to objectives based on international law and that
consequently do not jeopardize the legitimate interests of the other
side. Ending the Israeli occupation, for example, does not at all
infringe on the right of Israel to exist and live in peace within its
borders. Likewise, achieving a comprehensive and lasting peace for
Israelis does not require the persistence of any aspect of the
occupation. Looking at things from this angle makes it possible to see a
mutual peace with its mutual benefits on the horizon.

