The recent internal Palestinian crisis initiated by the task of forming
a cabinet--a crisis resolved only hours ago--cannot be described as the
kind of political emergency experienced by any normal government, or
even as the healthy practice of democracy. Indeed, it seems more that
this crisis is spurred by the serious existential questions that now
surround the life of the Palestinian Authority.

It is not possible to understand these internal Palestinian conflicts
and bitter disputes divorced from the failing peace process or
Israeli-Palestinian confrontations. In the last three years, Israel has
been systematically working to either dismantle the Palestinian
Authority or cause fundamental changes in its character and makeup. To
do this, the Israeli authorities have slowly narrowed the physical and
political space within which the Authority is able to move. By
eliminating the political prospect that this Palestinian Authority might
develop into the government of a state, Israel challenges its reason for
being. By narrowing Palestinian economic space through sanctions and
restrictions on the movement of people and goods, Israel keeps the
Palestinian Authority at its economic mercy and transfers at whim
Palestinian tax revenues. International aid often plays the role of
subsidizing the expenses of the occupation, thus deepening Palestinian
independence and easing Israel's financial burden. The Israeli military
has cut deeply into Palestinian security space with its repeated and
extensive operations in areas that were once under Palestinian security
control. Finally, Israel continues to narrow the geographic space of the
Palestinian Authority by reoccupying towns, restricting the movement of
all Palestinians (as well as officials of the Palestinian Authority),
expanding its settlements and confiscating land. What remains is barely
room to move.

These Israeli practices, coupled with Israeli and American conditions
prescribing under whom and under what conditions the Palestinian
Authority is a partner, are largely responsible for the continuing
internal debate in the Palestinian political arena. Maneuvering room is
extremely limited, producing many differences over the best way to
handle these restrictions and dilemmas. A specific example of this is
the debate among Palestinians over the role of Palestinian security. The
Israeli and American governments said they were only willing to deal
with the Palestinian Authority in the context of the peace process if
Palestinians unified their security apparatuses--with the intent, of
course, of taking specific actions against the Palestinian opposition.

That might make sense in theory, but when we consider the ongoing
Israeli practices listed above, the most glaring of which is Israel's
negligence towards the roadmap obligation of stopping settlement
expansion (which has no security implications whatsoever), the
Palestinian Authority finds it difficult to discern the best course back
to peace. What is in the best interest of Palestinians? There is a real
conflict here in the Israeli and international message.

Another example of the conflicting interests at play is when the
Palestinian Authority, headed legitimately by President Yasser Arafat,
is required to come up with a regularly formed cabinet that has the
confidence of the parliament and all the security powers required to
enforce law and order, while this same elected president is unable to
leave the confines of one building, meet with his constituency, oversee
the security forces which he commands according to the functioning
constitution, make sure that law and order is implemented, and even
attend the meeting of the Legislative Council in order to push things
along.

If Israel is to continue narrowing the breathing room of the Palestinian
Authority (half of the Palestinian people say they don't even feel the
Authority's presence) then Israel will eventually achieve its goal of
ridding itself of the Authority. That is the Israeli government's first
strategic objective on the road to strategic objective number two:
removing the practical possibility of an independent and viable
Palestinian state through intensive and illegal settlement expansion in
the occupied territories. Israel instead wants a kind of Palestinian
services administration to continue under an arbitrary Israeli security
regime: i.e. autonomy forever.

But Palestinians will not tolerate for much longer the contradictions
inherent in this continuing state of affairs. What we are seeing at work
today in the Palestinian political sphere is resistance to accepting
this miserable status quo. I think that we might be heading towards a
crossroads, whereby this enforced disintegration will either be reversed
by international peace efforts, or we will see an end to the Palestinian
Authority. In any case, there is no way that the Palestinian public will
allow its leadership to become a cover for the occupation.

