In order to whip up hatred for the settlers among the rest of Israel's
citizens, one of the areas where the left wing organizations have
focused their propaganda is the budgetary allotments invested in the
settlements instead of in the development towns. The recent terror war
witnessed the addition of a cruel, consensus-breaking propaganda
dimension: not only was money being wasted there, but blood was too.
Since the proportion of development town youth among the combat units is
growing, the development towns are paying not only the economic cost of
the settlements, but a cost in human lives as well.

Then came the Likud referendum and delivered a crushing blow not only to
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, but to all those who would sow dissent
between the settlers and the rest of the Israeli people, and especially
the development town dwellers. More than 70 percent of Likud members
from the development towns (compared with "only" 60 percent of the
total) voted against uprooting the Katif Bloc settlements. In other
words, they voted by a large majority in favor of continuing to invest
in the settlements instead of in development towns.

When the prime minister first conceived the disengagement plan he
assessed, in accordance with the atmosphere generated among the public
by the media, that Israelis opposed the settlers, were alienated from
their motives and were no longer prepared to sacrifice their blood and
their money for them. This, then, was the appropriate time for a
settlement removal plan. After all, it enjoyed widespread public support.

Indeed, during the early weeks of the disengagement plan Sharon's
concept appeared to be valid: at one point the polls showed that about
72 percent of Likud members supported it. But then, rather than giving
up, the Katif Bloc settlers decided to visit the homes of the Likud
Party faithful. They were quickly joined by volunteers from Judea and
Samaria; every settlement took responsibility for a voting region.

My settlement, Ofra, took on a tough Likud area, Holon, a lower-middle
class town near Tel Aviv. There, we were told, live a lot of "new"
Likudniks who have no ideological sentiments. Polls showed that more
than 75 percent supported Ariel Sharon. In the course of my house visits
I indeed encountered few people who had links from the past with the
historic Herut movement (which spawned today's Likud), one of whose key
principles was the sanctity of Greater Israel. Most hold "centrist"
views that are characteristic of Shinui voters or the mainstream of the
Labor Party. The vast majority had never visited a settlement, and few
had ever met a settler face-to-face. Nearly everything they knew about
the settlers was negative and was drawn from the media. The outcome in
Holon: 54 percent voted against uprooting the settlements.

The results show that the house visits staged by the settlers (around 50
percent of the registered Likud members who voted received a house
visit) generated among the Likudniks a cognitive shock. Nothing else can
explain the revolutionary transition from over 70 percent support for
Sharon around two weeks before the referendum to 60 percent opposition
to Sharon in the final count. Approximately 50 percent of registered
Likudniks changed their minds. The voters discovered--and I heard this
with my own ears--that their encounter with the settlers revealed a
totally different type of person than the monstrous image painted by the
media.

Based on this analysis of the "non-ideological" Likud voter--who
resembles, as noted, that of Shinui and the Labor mainstream--we can
assume that, were Sharon to be tempted in the near future, as he has
declared, to reveal a "different" plan and bring it to a national
referendum (he lacks a Knesset majority for holding a referendum, but
let's assume he has one), the results among the Jewish voters would be
similar. Because the settlers can be depended on to pay the voters
personal visits yet again. And no government in Israel, even one headed
by Yossi Beilin, can uproot settlements, even if it achieves a majority
in a referendum, without a Jewish majority.

