Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's essential strategy in dealing with
the Palestinian issue is one of coercion. He seeks to compel the
Palestinian leadership to accept Israel's security demands without
political conditions. Once the Palestinians do so, he seeks to compel
them to accept his political demands--essentially, a freezing of the
current status quo on the ground under the guise of a Palestinian
"state" in about half the territory. Since he believes that Rais Yasir
Arafat will not willingly comply with either aspect of this strategy,
and that Arafat is in any case a thoroughly non-credible leader, he
seeks, step-by-step, to ease him out of power.

It is of crucial importance to Sharon to accomplish these objectives
while maintaining a broad consensus of Israeli, American and possibly
even European support. This is the principal lesson he has learned from
the Lebanon fiasco of 1982. This explains why, in dealing aggressively
with Arafat, he appears frequently to be moving two steps forward, then
one step backward: today a preventive assassination or retaliatory
bombing, tomorrow a request that United States envoy Anthony Zinni
continue his efforts to reach a ceasefire. This also explains why one
day, in response to American cautionary remarks, he claims he is not
seeking Arafat's downfall, and the next day he states that "the story's
over" for the Palestinian leader. He is constantly maneuvering to make
sure a consensus is behind him. So far he is succeeding.

Behind this current operational strategy lie fundamental beliefs. Sharon
believes that a physical Israeli presence in the territory of the West
Bank and Gaza Strip is essential for Israel's security. To this end he
has, over the past 24 years, deployed scores of settlements at key
locations. He can recite a security "justification" for each and every
settlement, from Yitzhar in central Samaria to Netzarim in the heart of
the Gaza Strip. He believes the Oslo accords, which presage the removal
of these settlements, were a mistake. But they cannot be totally
reversed, nor should they, since reoccupying Area A would present Israel
with political and security challenges it cannot handle. Instead, Sharon
appears to believe that more cooperative and credible Palestinian
leaders than Arafat are potentially available to replace him and work
with Israel.

Sharon's military strategy is made possible by Arafat, who is
single-handedly destroying the last vestiges of his own credibility in
the West and the Arab world. Sharon has succeeded in persuading world
leaders, with the help of hard intelligence evidence, that Arafat is
behind the murderous Palestinian terrorist attacks. Now he wishes to
convince them that we would all be better off without Arafat.

This may not be hard to do. They have all met with the Rais in recent
years and heard his astonishing fantasies about the Mossad being behind
the worst Palestinian terrorist atrocities. They have heard Arafat
compare himself in his megalomania to de Gaulle and Mandela.
Well-intentioned American and Israeli negotiators who tried to work with
him at Camp David emerged with the impression that Arafat was nothing
but a "con man." Senior Palestinian leaders are complaining bitterly to
their Israeli and American counterparts that Arafat is "leading them
toward disaster." His current effort to arrest terrorist leaders is not
taken seriously anywhere. Even Egypt and Jordan are hard put to defend
the Palestinian leader.

Arafat, then, appears to have no real strategy for winning the war or
for making peace--only fantasies. After years of successful efforts his
grand strategy--a Palestinian state more or less within the 1967
borders--is now clearly attainable. But he seems incapable of abandoning
violence and knuckling down to the final, hard political decisions. Yet
Sharon's strategy is also not likely to win either the war or the peace.
Nine months after he took office, the violence has not been reduced, nor
is there any indication that the fall of Arafat will end the
bloodletting. On the contrary, Arafat is more likely to be succeeded by
Hamas, or by chaos, or both, than by Sharon's wish-list coalition of
cooperative warlords.

Sharon's record of installing willing Arab leaders--the Jumayils in
Lebanon in 1982 and 1983, and the Village Leagues in the West Bank in
1981--was disastrous for all concerned. Now once again, as in Lebanon
nearly 20 years ago, we are witnessing the intriguing but extremely
dangerous combination of Sharon's battalion-level calculations regarding
the value of territory, with his strategic grand design predicated on a
series of dominoes falling precisely as he wills them to--something that
never happens in the Middle East.

Thus, things could get worse if Sharon has his way.

The best alternative is for Palestinians themselves to "persuade" Arafat
to step aside, rest on his historical laurels, and be replaced in an
orderly fashion by a tough, patriotic but more pragmatic leader or
leaders. Given the Palestinian reality, that is probably impossible. In
which case Israel is better off withdrawing unilaterally, dismantling
problematic settlements and building high fences pending negotiations
with a willing Palestinian leader. But under no circumstances should it
meddle with the power structure in a neighboring Arab entity.

