The Palestinians in Israel have always been a very sensitive and even
explosive component of the Arab-Israeli conflict. The early intention of
Jewish forces, in particular their terrorist gangs, was to expel as many
indigenous Palestinians as possible in order to create a pure Jewish
state. Later, official Israel denied any intentions to push Palestinians
outside by force, but many Israeli historians have documented the direct
and deliberate role of Jewish terrorist groups in acting to get rid of
as many Palestinians as possible.

The second significant episode in shaping the dominant concerns of
Palestinians in Israel was their treatment at the hands of the Israeli
state in the fifties and sixties, in particular. These measures included
unusual and unnecessary security steps forcing Palestinians in Israel to
live under curfew with severe restrictions on movement from one village
to another, as well as the suppression of any political activities and
the quashing of freedom of expression. The racially discriminatory
practices of the state of Israel are today expressed in the unfair
provision of state services, beginning with the policy of expropriating
or confiscating Palestinian land and ending with lack of equal access to
education, employment and other services.

Later on, the political significance of the Palestinian population in
Israel took on new parameters as the minority began to vote in Israeli
elections, and through their representatives, in the Knesset itself.
There has been much discussion over the role Palestinians in Israel have
played in supporting and bringing down successive Israeli governments.

At the time of negotiating a final solution to the conflict, the
Palestinian-Israeli issue again rose to the surface, albeit in a
different way. During discussion with the Palestinian Liberation
Organization over the Palestinian refugee problem, Israel argued that it
could not accept any return of refugees because to do so would threaten
the Jewish "purity" of the state. Jewish Israelis take for granted that
Israel is the state of the Jewish people, which highlights once again
the sensitive position of Palestinians in Israel. The idea that Israel
must maintain Jewish "purity" contradicts the basic rights of more than
20 percent of the citizens of the state who are, on one hand, not Jewish
and, on the other hand, indigenous to this land.

As such, two complimentary principles regarding the Palestinians in
Israel must be respected by the PLO and Israel in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The Palestinian leadership and people
should respect the fact that these Palestinians are citizens of the
state of Israel, and demonstrate strategic understanding for all of the
consequences of that fact. As such, the leadership should respect their
will, their choices and their right to adopt any political position and
behavior they so desire. Israel, in turn, must respect its own citizens,
bringing an end to discrimination against these Palestinians and no
longer neglecting their presence and specific history, both of which
allow Israeli officials to opine on the "nature of the state."

