When two rivals were in conflict in the Middle Ages in Europe, they
resolved the issue in a duel. In the Arabian Peninsula, from the
beginning of time, two adversaries battled in poetry until one claimed
victory over the other.

Here in the Middle East, Palestinian President Yasser Arafat and Israeli
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon came to life two months ago, each throwing
down the gauntlet and landing punches through statements and press
conferences. Journalists don't attend these press conferences in search
of new developments (they are always the same thing), but only to be a
part of this historic face-off and add a line to their resumes.

All of a sudden, Arafat and Sharon have become generous in granting
interviews and statements without prepared speeches. Everything is now
clear to them and their eyes are turned away from notes diligently
prepared by their advisors.

"Sharon will not reveal his vision of the relationship with the
Palestinians or of a final solution except at the negotiating table,
which will be after the security situation allows," we were told when
Palestinian journalists asked an advisor close to the prime minister
what Sharon really wants but hasn't disclosed. "This way he leaves
himself a margin for negotiation."

The Palestinian president's position was also an amazing silence.
Palestinians had begun to see his position as a giant riddle--the
silence puzzled them, at the same time that conflicting signals were
coming from other Palestinian leaders.

When university professors asked President Arafat why he had stopped
addressing his people during the more than one year of confrontations
with Israel, he shrugged, "What should I say?" He then went on to
express not bewilderment, but a conviction that it was necessary to
refrain from speaking at times when his words would be echoed in
Washington, Tel Aviv and European capitals, misinterpreted by the media
and his own words turned against him.

The leaders' advisors had been worried that each would make statements
not serving their cause. Suddenly, however, there was an about-face. The
flow of statements from Sharon and Arafat gushed out in repetition--they
made themselves very clear.

Now Sharon says, "Arafat is not a partner; he is a terrorist and we
cannot work with him. We must look for an alternative." Too, Sharon has
begun to boast that he agrees to a Palestinian state, to be established
after all, after some time and after changes among Palestinians.

Arafat, for his part, says over and over again, "The Israeli tanks do
not scare me and will not stop me from continuing on this path to
liberate my country, even if a million martyrs result...One hundred
percent of the lands occupied in 1967, with a just solution to the
refugee problem."

Why has Sharon disclosed what he wants without arriving at the
negotiating table? And how did Arafat conclude that he should unveil his
reasons for insisting at Camp David on a state with real sovereignty, on
100 percent of the land occupied in 1967 (or its equivalent), with a
just solution to the refugee problem? Perhaps for the first time in the
history of his leadership, Arafat has resorted to writing articles in
American newspapers to communicate his words and position to the
American administration, which refuses to listen to him.

After Israel convinced the American administration of its version of the
Karine A ship affair, and the Arab leaders stopped addressing the
Palestinian leader, Sharon saw before him the long-awaited chance to
wring Arafat's neck. It was time to make him surrender--or cause him
death. That is why Sharon has finally relaxed and broken his silence.

But at the very moment when Arafat had nothing more to fear, when
Israeli tanks were practically on his balcony, the barrels of their guns
pointing in the window of his Ramallah presidential headquarters, Arafat
began to sing a different chorus. It was, "We welcome martyrdom for
Jerusalem" and its message was strong and fearsome, implying that the
political back and forth had reached its brink and deciding point.
Arafat was threatening the rules of the game, loathe to surrender and
telling the entire world that he does not fear death.

When the laws of classical warfare do not apply, negotiations take place
in the media. Arafat seemed indifferent to Israeli military force and US
support for Sharon's position. He felt that his adversary was not
leaving him any room to maneuver, thus forcing him to reverse the rules
of the game, refusing to surrender and meeting death fearlessly.

Arafat may have used primitive methods to express this, but they were
effective. Even the United States got the message (though it was
whispered that the US wished Arafat would not discuss martyrdom or jihad
in front of his supporters.)

Arafat's declarations vacillated between addressing his supportive
masses in language sending hints to Israel and the United States and an
enormous flow of newspaper articles, culminating in his article on "The
Palestinian Vision of Peace."

It is not surprising that "The Palestinian Vision of Peace" was written
in English and in the pages of the New York Times--and not in the pages
of the Palestinian publication Al Hayat Al Jadida. Nor is it any
coincidence that most of Sharon's articles were written in English, as
well.

The target audiences of these media negotiations are Washington and
European capitals, above anyone else.

