There appears to be a probability greater than 50 percent that, sometime
in the months ahead, the United States will launch a military initiative
designed to remove Saddam Hussein's regime in Iraq. Assuming this
happens, it appears likely that Saddam will respond, as in the past, by
attacking Israel. Unlike the Iraqi non-conventional missile attack of
1991, this time Saddam is thought likely to use some sort of
non-conventional weapon--chemical or biological--delivered against
Israel either in a missile warhead or by aircraft.

Conceivably the damage would not be great. The Iraqi ordnance stock is
primitive and run down, and Israel today possesses far more effective
countermeasures than in 1991. But Iraq would have crossed a dangerous
threshold for the entire Middle East.

This, then, is the most likely scenario. It is by no means a certainty.
One could introduce variables in any of its segments. Indeed, one could
dismiss it altogether, insofar as events in the Middle East rarely
unfold in accordance with predictions. But because the events it
describes are potentially of far-reaching strategic importance for
Israelis, Palestinians, and other Arabs, and because US Vice President
Cheney is coming to the region to discuss Iraq, the ramifications of
this scenario are worthy of analysis, however speculatively.

First of all, the Israeli-Palestinian aspects. Assuming that when this
scenario takes place the current Israeli-Palestinian conflict is still
raging, an Iraqi attack on Israel would exacerbate it. Many Palestinians
are likely to identify openly with Saddam, who will undoubtedly lump the
US and Israel together as enemies of the Arabs and claim, as he did in
1990-1991, to be fighting the Palestinians' war. So Israel could find
itself fighting on two fronts: one, internal, Palestinian, and a second,
over the horizon, Iraqi. Conceivably, active Palestinian support for
Iraq would free Israel's hand to deal more harshly with the Palestinian
uprising.

An Israeli counterattack against Iraq would be far more likely this time
than in 1991, when Israel avoided an armed response to Saddam's
missiles. This is particularly so if Iraq uses non-conventional weapons
and Israel sustains casualties. Israel's response might escalate
tensions throughout the Middle East. This might play into Palestinian
hands. But it would also strengthen Israel's deterrent profile, which
was damaged by its restraint in 1991 and by its unilateral withdrawal
from Lebanon.

Ramifications for Jordan of this scenario are particularly sensitive.
Because Jordan constitutes a territorial buffer between Israel and Iraq,
its sovereignty might in some way be compromised by an escalating
Iraqi-Israeli exchange. And because Jordan has a large Palestinian
population, its sociopolitical stability might be adversely affected.

Then there are the ramifications for Israeli-American relations and for
regional stability. America's calculations regarding the need for broad
Arab backing for--or at least acquiescence in--its offensive against
Iraq, might cause it to exercise pressure on Israel, prior to the
attack, to reduce the profile of Israeli-Palestinian fighting. The
impending missions to the area by Cheney and US envoy Anthony Zinni
might be the occasion to launch this pressure. The US might also
pressure Israel, as it did in 1991, to abstain from responding
militarily to an Iraqi attack. Israel would have to weigh its own need
to maintain its deterrent by striking back, against both potential
damage to American interests and to regional stability and the possible
denial of benefits that Israel might reap by remaining passive during a
successful US campaign against Saddam.

On the other hand, a failed American attempt to depose Saddam by force
would seriously damage US prestige in the region. It would constitute a
blow against all moderate regimes and an immense morale booster for the
forces of Islamic extremism. Moreover, possible Iraqi use of
non-conventional weapons, as anticipated here, might radically escalate
the Middle East arms race. This would affect not only the Israel-Arab
sphere, but Iran, Syria, Libya and their neighbors as well.

Yet assuming the US attacks Iraq and succeeds in deposing Saddam and
installing a moderate new regime, this will have potentially
far-reaching ramifications for other radical regimes in the region.
Syria and Iran, for example, will understand that the Bush
administration is indeed willing and able to use force against Middle
East states that support terrorism. The outcome might even be a peaceful
evolution of their policies, away from terrorism. All the elements in
the Palestinian Authority that engage in terrorism would witness a
dramatic erosion in regional support for their policies. The overall
outcome would be positive not only for Israel, but for regional
stability and moderation in general.

