Judging by the number of statements made by United States President
George W. Bush regarding the separation fence, or "wall" as he termed it
a while ago, one might conclude that this is one of the central problems
confronting American foreign policy. Indeed, based on the diplomatic and
media interest displayed in the fence in western Europe, we could assume
that this is one of the central problems of the world.

We recall that the primary impetus for constructing the fence came from
the Israeli political left. Beyond enhancing security, the left had two
principal objectives: 1) once again to separate the State of Israel from
Judea and Samaria, and thereby to ensure that in Judea and Samaria there
would arise a Palestinian state; and 2) to isolate the settlers, to
cause them to feel "beyond the fence"--a loaded term from the standpoint
of Jewish history, meaning removal from the community--so their will
would break and they would abandon the settlements, or at least the more
distant and isolated ones.

We also recall that, for precisely the same reasons that the left
supported the fence, the settlers opposed it. But they had a problem:
they feared lest their opposition be interpreted as sectorial
selfishness--as if, in order to prevent the political fallout from the
fence, they were ready to detract from the overall security of Israelis,
most of whom, including supporters of the settlers, saw in the fence a
genuine source of salvation. Indeed, the Yesha Council (Council of the
Communities in Judea, Samaria and Gaza) took a position contrary to that
of the majority of residents of the ideological settlements, and ceased
opposing the fence. Notably, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon initially
opposed the fence for the same reasons as the settlers. But he changed
his position under massive pressure from a panicky public, orchestrated
by the media with its decisive leftist influence.

The separation fence does not lie precisely on the green line, as the
left and the Palestinians wanted. In at least one area, Ariel, it is
planned to curve some 20 kilometers deep into the region that they,
along with their Israeli and American supporters, see as the future
Palestinian state. Not surprisingly, this has turned the tables: the
left and the front organizations it generated to "push" the fence (e.g.,
regional councils comprising villages connected organizationally
directly to the Labor Party, various non-governmental organizations,
etc.) have now begun to follow the American lead and oppose the fence.
After all, America is the source of authority; its plans, such as the
roadmap                                                 , are supported
by the left, which depends mainly on American pressure in order to
realize its political schemes.

Yet it is on the right, particularly among the settlers, that the more
dramatic turnabout has taken place. The settlers' support for the fence
has evolved from ex post facto tactical acquiescence to something
approaching strategic support. Their detractors, including the analysts
of Israeli affairs in the intelligence and foreign offices of Europe and
the United States, can now draw far-reaching conclusions:

First, Sharon's fence, the fence that has provoked such strong protest
from the president, the Palestinians and the Israeli left, leaves under
Palestinian sovereignty large portions of the historic Land of Israel.

Secondly, the settlers' support for the current course of the fence
ostensibly proves, at least judging by the policy of their
representative body, the Yesha Council, that at the deepest ideological
level the primary motivation for the massive settlement movement of the
past three decades--maintaining the territory of the Land of Israel
under the sovereignty of the State of Israel--is no longer the central
objective.

Accordingly, preserving the settlement status quo, i.e., the existence
of the settlements, is from herein the central goal of the Yesha Council.

On Sunday, August 10, Israel's activist foreign minister, Sylvan Shalom,
announced that "even friends can disagree" and that Israel, despite
considerable American opposition, "will continue to build the separation
fence as planned." Here the Sharon government's objectives dovetail with
those of the settlers, who have a realistic assessment of its ability to
maneuver. The government cannot and perhaps does not wish to challenge
the Americans regarding the roadmap, i.e., concerning the establishment
of a Palestinian state. Regarding the fence, on the other hand, the
government is prepared for a confrontation. The reason: most voters,
worn down by the past three years' vicious terrorist war, will support
it over the fence, even if this means confrontation with America--but
will not support confrontation over a Palestinian state. Perhaps, too,
someone senior in the Israeli government knows that regarding the fence,
despite the harsh exchanges, the Americans will not enter into all-out
confrontation with Israel.

The important issue for the administration is the roadmap. If it can be
implemented, the American taxpayer will in any case have to fork out
tens of billions of dollars. So it makes little difference if two or
three billion are added to cover the cost of dismantling the present
fence and building a new one--a fence that follows the course of the
border which, the Americans calculate, will be agreed upon in accordance
with the roadmap.

