One of the biggest mistakes Israel made in drafting the Oslo Declaration
of Principles in 1993 was an error of omission concerning the "Israeli
Arabs"--the Palestinian Arab citizens of Israel. The Israeli negotiators
assumed that, once Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat had accepted the
Israeli condition that the Palestine Liberation Organization could
represent all Palestinians everywhere except those living in Israel (who
as Israeli citizens are represented by the government of Israel, the
other signatory to Oslo), the ensuing peace process would not involve
them. Accordingly, Israeli governments could continue to ignore not only
Israeli Arabs' material and civil needs, but their national sentiments
as well.

The consequence of this mistake burst upon us dramatically in the
violent clashes of October 2000, when the Israeli Arab community briefly
joined the Intifada and 12 of its members were killed by the Israel
Police. The Israeli Jewish majority suddenly and painfully realized that
the emerging prospect of a neighboring Palestinian state, coupled with
the strengthening of the Islamic movement and against the backdrop of
decades of second-class citizenship, had radicalized Israeli Arab
politics. Israel was being told to provide a national solution for
Palestinians not only in the West Bank and Gaza, but in the Galilee and
the Triangle, too.

These developments, and more, began to radicalize Israeli Jewish
attitudes as well. Arafat's insistence on the right of return of the
1948 refugees and his determination that Jews have no status on the
Temple Mount, coupled with waves of suicide bombings and the growing
evidence that tens of thousands of Palestinians from Jordan, the West
Bank and Gaza were illegally "returning" into Israeli Arab villages (one
of them was the 13th victim of the brief Israeli Arab Intifada), in
effect merged the "Israeli Arab" and Palestinian issues in the eyes of
many Israeli Jews.

For most Israelis, alarm focused on what appeared to be a short-term
Palestinian strategy of "one and a half Palestinian states": the
establishment of a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza based on
conditions (the Temple Mount, return of refugees) that embodied
Palestinian denial of the Zionist precept of a Jewish state for the
Jewish people, while Israel itself would absorb returning Palestinian
refugees and yield to the demands of its Palestinian citizens to become
a "state of all its citizens." Time would take care of the rest, with
Israel moving through binational status to eventually become another
Palestinian Arab state.

The reaction to this perception among Israeli Jews has been a sharp
reaffirmation of the precept of a Jewish state. The post-Zionist school
among some Israeli intellectuals who used to advocate a "state of all
its citizens" has been severely delegitimized. Radical new solutions
have been formulated that combine measures for the West Bank and Gaza
with measures concerning Israeli Arabs and that emphasize the need for
national physical separation between Jews and Arabs.

Some of the solutions are positive. Thus, support for a Palestinian
state has actually risen among Israeli Jews during two years of
Intifada. So has support for unilateral withdrawal by Israel and
dismantling of provocative settlements. Some are problematic.
Increasingly, Israelis advocate redrawing the Green Line so that Israeli
Arab villages in the Triangle and Wadi Ara regions are included in the
State of Palestine. And some of the solutions are criminal: there is a
growing and frightening camp of advocates of arbitrary "transfer" of
Palestinians to areas beyond the confines of Israel/Palestine.

The "Israeli Arab" issue in effect is now at the cutting edge of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and the two are no longer separable.

Both communities have a lot of soul-searching to do. Israel must remain
a Jewish state--otherwise it has no "raison d'etre"--but it must be
democratic in nature and cannot obliterate or ignore the Palestinian
identity of 18 percent of its population. The latter must recognize that
one Palestinian state is the most they can aspire to, and that they
won't be living in it. If they want a Palestinian Arab national
identity, and that is certainly legitimate, they should plan to move to
that state.

Israeli Jews can hardly approach the challenging task of defining some
sort of culturally autonomous status for the Israeli Palestinian
minority until they have defined among themselves the Jewish "majority"
nature of Israel itself: how religious, how secular national, and how
pluralistic? This is a daunting task that threatens to split the Israeli
national fabric.

Palestinian citizens of Israel can hardly be asked to rationalize their
status until the final borders that delineate and separate "independent
Arab and Jewish states" (the language of United Nations General Assembly
Resolution 181 from 1947) in Mandatory Palestine are determined. They
should get truly equal civil status and minority rights, but they must
come to terms with the basic nature of Israel as a Jewish state.
Recognizing that Jews are a people with a legitimate right to
self-determination in their historic homeland is a daunting challenge
for most Arabs and Muslims anywhere. The Palestinian citizens of Israel
must take the lead.

