Q: Do you think the United States will attack Iraq?

A: I think that the United States desires this, but an attack
will depend on many factors. One of these is how the Iraqis will behave.
If [Iraqi President] Saddam Hussein does things the way he did in 1990
and 1991, then obviously he will give the Americans the opportunity.

I do not think that the positions of the Arab states will assist the US.
Let's be frank, the attack against Iraq in 1991 was only possible
because Kuwait and Saudi Arabia financed the whole operation. The
Americans at that time were interested in oil supply, but also in
getting rid of all the munitions stock left in German after the end of
the Cold War.

I am not sure that Saudi Arabia or Kuwait will now finance such an
adventure. The second thing is that I am not sure that the Saudis or the
Kuwaitis will offer the use of their bases. The Americans can launch an
attack without those bases, but it will not have the same impact and
efficiency. The third factor is the position of the Europeans and the
Russians.

Q: What will happen in the Middle East in general, as a
result of an attack?

A: I think it will be a tragedy, first of all, because I am
sure that the Iraqis are not developing weapons of mass destruction. To
develop such things, you need know-how technology. This technology is in
the hands of either the Europeans, like the French who twice gave the
Iraqis nuclear reactors, or China or some advanced states. I am sure
that none of these advanced states, whether the Europeans or Russia or
even China are ready to supply the Iraqis with the components for
weapons of mass destruction.

We have to understand why the Americans want to hit Iraq, which is to
redraw the map in the Middle East. I think the Americans want to get rid
of all who are against American policy in the area and even to create
new territorial entities, maybe to divide Iraq, and to push the Saudis
or Gulf States in general to apply new policies that do not breed
fundamentalists like those we saw in the events of September 11.

Q: How might Palestinians and Israelis try to manipulate this
issue?

A: I think that the Israelis are already trying to exaggerate
the Iraqi capacity. In 1991, they created a great deal of propaganda
about the Scud missiles and succeeded in getting many millions of
dollars as a result. In reality, we were talking about 39 missiles. I am
not approving that, but let's be frank, we are talking about 39
missiles, each of which only has 250 kilograms of TNT.

That means that all the missiles launched against Israel combined
carried less than one half of the munitions dropped in one B-52 bombing
raid, which drops 21 tons in one air raid alone. Today, Iraq has even
less capacity.

The UN inspections teams spent seven years in Iraq and what they will
now find, they already know about. I am not saying that Iraq was not
entertaining biological or chemical weapons, but I think that most of
these have been destroyed and rendered insignificant. Still, the
Israelis are trying to influence the Americans.

The Palestinian capacity to influence American decision-making is
insignificant, but I think that the Palestinians, through their Intifada
and maybe taking public positions against hitting Iraq, could have some
impact.

In the Gulf War, I argued very strongly that the Iraqi invasion was an
aggression and that we as Palestinians could not accept that a stronger
power would invade a smaller state even under the pretext of uniting the
Arab world. But this time, things are different. The Iraqis are not
invading anyone and they have suffered a huge loss. It is enough.
Despite the fact that I really would like if Iraq were to get rid of
Saddam Hussein, I don't think that this will happen through the
destruction of Iraq. As a matter of fact, I think that the economic
embargo mainly helped Saddam Hussein in becoming the only financial
power inside Iraq and in manipulating internal politics.

But Palestinians seem not to be relating a lot between what is going on
in Palestine and Iraq. We have to understand that there will be an
important relationship, to think about it and how to deal with it. When
the Americans hit Iraq and succeed at destroying Saddam and changing the
regime, I think they will give the green light to the Israelis to
destroy the Palestinians. I think that there is some relationship
between what is going on in Palestine today and what will happen in Iraq.

Palestinians have to, on the one hand, convince the Iraqis to be less
hard-line, and on the other hand offer their position loudly and
frankly. Our role is to try to prevent an attack against Iraq, but not
appear at all to be allies of Saddam Hussein. And if the Americans are
really ready to do something good for Palestinians, let it be before a
strike on Iraq, not after.

