The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has always been very sensitive to
regional developments, in particular because the two parties are
strongly dependent on regional and international players and scenarios.
The Gulf War, for example, influenced the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
directly. The war in Afghanistan is the most recent example of how
regional developments can strongly bend the conflict in one direction or
another.

Growing international opposition, non-conducive regional conditions and
Iraqi attempts to absorb the pressure with diplomacy, thus avoiding
confrontation, is making it seem less and less likely that the United
States will attack Iraq. But if the US administration does move forward,
intervention in Iraq will likely have dramatic consequences on the
ongoing Palestinian-Israeli crisis. One reason is the geopolitical
proximity of Iraq. Another reason is the ongoing American-supported
Israeli military aggression and growing sensitivity in the Arab world to
Palestinian suffering alongside hostility towards US Middle East policy.

US intervention in Iraq will have an effect on the Middle East even
before it happens. If the United States intervenes in Iraq, it will
require a relatively conducive political atmosphere in the Arab world.
Otherwise, that engagement will have extremely negative effects, not
only on American Middle East policy, but also on the intervention
itself. That is why Americans have to prepare the ground beforehand in
such a way that includes influencing the course of events in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

These American efforts will create a paradox because the calm the US so
badly requires can be achieved, in principle, in one of two ways: either
by allowing Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to try to achieve calm,
which he claims he can accomplish if the Americans just give him a free
hand for further use of force, or by restraining Sharon and producing a
political initiative with enough weight to deal with the confrontations
and spur a ceasefire.

But both of these scenarios have been tried to some extent, with obvious
failure. That is why the occupying Israeli army continues to try to
achieve quiet by force and the Palestinian violent resistance also
continues trying to achieve a political horizon. In other words,
American officials must come up with something new in the Middle East if
they want to create a political situation conducive for possible Iraq
intervention.

On the eve of the visit of US envoy General Anthony Zinni, there is no
sign that he is carrying any promising new approach. The most likely
scenario, therefore, is that the Americans will approach the period of
possible intervention without preparing the theater--at least as far as
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is concerned.

The other important consideration in this regard is that the two sides
are readying to take advantage of the looming scenario in Iraq. Israel,
for example, might have an interest in continuing violent confrontations
with the Palestinians until and throughout a possible Iraqi-American
confrontation. They are likely planning to try to use that occasion to
further associate the Palestinians with "evil"--this time, Iraq--and
themselves with "good," or the Americans.

Instead of moderating the Palestinian-Israeli crisis with an effective
political initiative, the American administration seems likely to simply
use its might and bilateral leverage on the parties to force them to
reduce the confrontations. Once the US intervention is underway,
however, there is nothing to prevent Israel from trying to take
advantage of the situation created at the very least by Palestinian
public identification with the Iraqi people. Israel will try to give the
outside world the impression that it is simply trying to compliment in
Palestine what the Americans are accomplishing in Iraq.

