The wall that Israel has been building in the Palestinian occupied
territories under the pretext of security, the wall that is being called
the apartheid wall by the Palestinian side, has lately drawn a great
deal of high-level attention.

From a Palestinian point of view, this critical attention, including the
pointed comments of United States Secretary of State Colin Powell,
National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice and President George W. Bush,
is a success of the ceasefire. When things started to calm down, Israel
found itself without justification for its practices. The same can be
said for Israel's wide-reaching restrictions on movement, which make no
security sense but are rather collective punishment of the entire
Palestinian people. Once the gun smoke cleared, Israel's true intentions
were laid bare.

In this climate, the continuation of Israeli settlement expansion, and
the construction of the wall (a wall I have previously dubbed
"settlement plus") cannot be defended. The growth of settlements and the
expropriation of Palestinian land, both of which have intensified in
recent weeks, expose the true nature of Israel's practices in the
occupied territories--to consolidate occupation by creating immovable
facts on the ground and therefore prejudice the final outcome of
negotiations, including the vision of President Bush, which is based on
the two-state solution. To soften the impact of this project on
international public opinion, the Israelis insist on calling the massive
several-layered barrier fortified with guard towers, electrified fencing
and tiers of barbed wire a "fence" and describing it as a means to
prevent Palestinians with violent intentions from infiltrating Israel.

But even Colin Powell expressed amazement that a country would try to
"defend" its borders by building a concrete 24-foot-high wall deep
inside the territory of another country--a neighbor with which Israel
purportedly wants to live in peace. The wall has been used as a pretext
to confiscate more than 20,000 acres (80,000 dunams) of Palestinian
agricultural land, which has subsequently caused unemployment in the
towns of Tulkarem, Qalqilya and Jenin to rise to 70 percent. There is no
security logic here.

Seen however, as an expansion project meant to colonize more land, the
wall makes perfect sense. It surrounds and isolates Palestinian
population centers and villages from their open agricultural land, while
further separating Palestinians from illegal Jewish settlements also
built on their land. It is part and parcel of other Israeli measures in
the occupied territories which are creating two separate
communities--one Jewish, the other Arab--that are separated physically
and subject to two separate legal systems, economic opportunities, and
restrictions down to the very roads they are allowed to drive on. In
South Africa, they called this apartheid.

If Israel is trying through this settlement consolidation project and
like activities to prevent the practical possibility of a viable
Palestinian state, then it is well on its way. The result will mean a
heavy price for Palestinians who will likely lose their opportunity for
statehood, independence and self-determination--but Israel will also
lose dearly as it gives up its opportunity to maintain a Jewish state.
If the two-state solution is impossible, the result will be one
political entity between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea.
Regardless of what the name of that place is or who controls it, the
likelihood of it being a democratic Jewish state is pretty slim.

