I was personally involved in campaigning for the West Bank security
fence. I am increasingly unhappy with some of the results.

Around two years ago, as a member of the executive of the Council for
Peace and Security, a non-governmental organization that groups some
1,200 former senior security personnel, I supported our sponsorship of
the fence. Our idea was to base the fence on the green line (1948
armistice line) between Israel and the West Bank. The primary objective
was to keep out suicide bombers, who at the time were walking and even
driving across the border freely, with devastating effect on Israel. An
earlier fence around the Gaza Strip has proven a formidable barrier
against suicide bombers. It seemed to us that it is the primary
obligation of any Israeli government to protect the 97 percent of its
citizens who live within the green line by building a fence.

The fence as we conceived it had several additional purposes. One, at
the strategic level, was to delegitimize the isolated settlements (but
not the settlement blocs) that lie beyond it. We advocated their
immediate removal, if only to free up the large numbers of Israeli
security forces that guard them, so they could patrol the fence. We
argued that even if the Sharon government did not remove the
settlements, the existence of the fence between them and the State of
Israel would contribute to their withering away. In the atmosphere of
the past three years of failed peace process and Palestinian suicide
violence, the fence was a legitimate expression of the desire of the
vast majority of Israelis to separate our Jewish democratic state from
the Palestinian territories, once and for all. Not to occupy or annex,
but rather to go our separate ways and protect ourselves.

The fence had additional, tactical objectives. One was keeping out
illegal Palestinian "returnees", whose numbers inside Israel have
reached around 100,000. Another was to stop rampant thievery--of cars,
agricultural equipment and produce, etc.--from across the green line.

The only deviations from the green line that we contemplated were for
topographic security considerations, and to include settlements located
directly across the line.

Prime Minister Ariel Sharon initially opposed the fence, essentially
because he feared the repercussions for the settlements, which ensure
long term Israeli control over the West Bank. For obvious reasons, so
did the settlers themselves. Eventually Sharon bowed to extensive public
pressure, some of which we engineered, and undertook reluctantly to
build the fence more or less along the green line.

When pressure was applied by settlers to include more and more of their
homes within the fence, Sharon saw an opening to "hijack" the fence for
his own purposes. This began with rather extensive deviations--and
consequent hardships imposed on Palestinian towns and villages--to
accommodate more distant settlements. Thus, in order to include Alfei
Menashe inside the fence, the town of Qalqilya had to be fenced in on
almost all sides and rendered a virtual enclave.

Still, most of the first two sections of the fence, the northernmost,
are on or close to the green line. Along with some 22 kilometers of
fencing in northern and southern Jerusalem, they have contributed in
recent months (even before the ceasefire) to a genuine reduction in
penetrations by terrorists into Israeli territory.

But when it came time to plan Section III of the fence, linking the
Elkana-Ariel settlement region with Jerusalem, Sharon, now backed by the
settlers, instructed the security establishment to plan a fence that
deviates deep into the West Bank and attaches numerous settlements to
Israel. Many Palestinian villages caught inside this area would
themselves be fenced in and turned into enclaves. Sharon also revealed
that he envisaged an "eastern fence" cutting off the West Bank mountain
heartland from the Jordan Valley. In other words, Sharon intends to
transform the fence from a security-separation barrier to a means of
defining the enclave-like nature of that 50 percent or so of the West
Bank that he intends to offer the Palestinians as a "state".

This is where the Bush administration has stepped in. Its protest
against the fence, while generalized, is primarily (and legitimately)
aimed at Sharon's attempts to politicize what is essentially a sound
security measure and to create disastrous "territorial facts" regarding
final status, at a time when the two sides should be contemplating
renewing negotiations.

While a skillful Palestinian public diplomacy campaign was instrumental
in energizing the administration on the fence issue, the famous
Palestinian power point presentation that made the rounds of Washington
is also instructive for its own distortions of the issue. It calls the
fence a "wall" even though only nine kilometers out of 183 under
construction or completed are configured as walls. While it legitimately
highlights human rights abuses generated by the fence, it conveniently
ignores the real reason for building it: the Palestinian suicide bombing
campaign that was perceived by Israelis as a quasi-existential threat,
and which the Palestinian Authority and the Palestine Liberation
Organization did nothing to stop.

It is Palestinian terrorism that caused the fence to be built in the
first place. Against terrorism, the fence works. If built on or near the
green line, the concept is right, and could ultimately also have
positive strategic political ramifications for both sides. Now,
unfortunately, thanks to Sharon's excesses, the fence has taken on the
dimensions of a fiasco.

