In the course of the past two weeks we have been the target of parallel
media campaigns launched from headquarters in Jerusalem and Ramallah.
Prime Ariel Minister Sharon has been interviewed by the Israeli media,
even in his bedroom slippers, to mark the first anniversary of his
election victory. Palestinian leader Arafat is obliged by circumstance
to invite Israeli journalists to visit him in order to speak through
their good offices to the Israeli public. Both, it should be noted, are
speaking only to the Israeli public.

Sharon pats his sheep and displays fistfuls of earth to prove he is in
touch with reality. Arafat reassures us that his order of priorities for
the right of return involves "only" 200,000 Palestinian refugees from
Lebanon. The impression is that Arafat is trying first and foremost to
show that the "punishment" imposed on him by Sharon two months
ago--confinement to Ramallah--has in no way bowed the leader of the
Palestinian people.

Neither of the two is convincing. Like Sharon, Arafat comes across as
someone constrained by his PR advisors to do what he doesn't enjoy
doing; he would much prefer to dispense with the media. Sharon, too,
will continue to prefer to talk "off the record." When confronted with
journalists' tape recorders he falls back on his well-known concepts:
Arafat is irrelevant; without seven days of quiet, political talks won't
be renewed; no one will partition Jerusalem. Arafat, in response,
needles Sharon cautiously, exploiting the cameras to display just how
popular he is. All this, against a backdrop of reports on the
orchestrated pilgrimage of Palestinians to Arafat's besieged
headquarters in Ramallah. Totally unconvincing we already mentioned?
Where is the political plan?

Arafat, like Sharon, emerges as a stubborn client: bad for the
interviewer, very bad for the interviewee. You come to him with a list
of questions and he responds with partial sentences. Instead of answers,
you receive worn out slogans. And all the while, hundreds of thousands
on both sides are desperate to see some white smoke at the end of the
tunnel of violence. How, they ask, can we break the vicious circle of
mutual recriminations? Can someone in Jerusalem or Ramallah reassure us
that this conflict won't escalate yet further?

One of my internet conversation partners, a hard up teacher in a West
Bank refugee camp, writes me two or three times a week and describes
what he and his family go through with the roadblocks, the tanks, the
terrible economic distress. His descriptions, in elegant Arabic, are
very hard to digest. "Does Arafat have a solution?" I ask him. It turns
out my correspondent is looking for answers only on the Israeli side.

Under present circumstances it's hard to find media on our side that
will stand up for Arafat. Israelis are more attracted by the latest
idea: to move on to an alternative leadership drawn from Arafat's
entourage. Abu Alaa, Abu Maazen, Sari Nusseibeh, Rajoub, Dahlan--all
have been presented to Israeli news consumers as people who have become
acquainted with their politics and politicians, and who can
realistically identify the red lines, the room for maneuver in the game
of power. They address the Israeli in his own language; none of them
threaten us with more martyrs.

The Israeli man on the street looks ready to grab onto a new Palestinian
persona. Meanwhile Arafat just adds new furrows to our brows every time
he pulls out of thin air accusations of "depleted uranium" and poisoned
wells. Better, honorable Rais, to explain the Karine A affair. Believe
me, Chairman Arafat, if you just looked straight at the camera of Israel
TV Channel 1 or 2, stopped throwing out empty promises, and talked about
what is really bothering you and what you intend to do about it in
energetic cooperation with the Israeli peace camp, you would win it over
in minutes.

