In 1991 the coalition victory over Iraq in the Gulf War paved the way
for the Middle East peace process. That process started with the Madrid
Peace Conference in October 1991 and culminated during the '90s in the
conclusion of an Israeli-Jordanian peace agreement and a series of
Israeli-Palestinian partial agreements within the framework of the Oslo
process. Oslo collapsed in 2000 and was engulfed by violence after the
government of Ehud Barak failed in its vigorous attempts to conclude a
permanent agreement with the Palestinians as well as a peace agreement
with Syria.

The assumption that the United States has chosen war on Iraq as the next
stage in the war on terrorism raises an intriguing question: Is this
future war going to have an equally sweeping effect on the Israel-Arab
relationship, and in what manner?

The goals of the war would be the removal of Saddam Hussein's regime and
the resumption of United Nations monitoring regarding weapons of mass
destruction (WMD). These goals are more ambitious than the goals of the
1991 Gulf War. That difference, and the different political environment,
may have several repercussions:

- First, it will be a more risky operation and the possibility of
failure should be taken into account.

- Secondly, the threat to his very existence may lead Iraqi leader
Saddam Hussein to react in a brutal and unconstrained way. This could
include the use of weapons of mass destruction against US allies in the
Middle East, Israel and others. That in turn might generate reactions by
Israel and the US that would have a lasting effect on the entire Middle
East.

- Third, this war is not likely to be a coalition war. Most probably it
will be carried out by the US alone, perhaps with some limited British
participation and the passive cooperation of some US allies in the
Middle East.

If the US operation fails, this will undermine the US position in the
Middle East. It will strengthen the radical anti-American regimes and
movements, and will send a very negative signal to the moderates. They
will understand that they cannot count on US protection and that the
only way left for them is to accommodate the radicals and yield to the
anti-US sentiments that are so popular in broad Arab audiences.

This in turn will have a negative effect on the Arab-Israel
relationship. Those who prefer the use of violence against Israel will
gather more confidence while the moderates in the Arab world will be
afraid to challenge them.

Although this possibility of failure has to be considered, it is more
probable that the US will succeed in achieving its goals. The proven US
military capabilities, the weakness of Iraq's armed forces and the fact
that Saddam's regime is hated by so many Iraqis, all give credence to
the assumption that with careful planning, equal to the level of
planning of the Afghanistan operation, the US can succeed in this mission.

Success will have the opposite effect of failure. US allies in the
Middle East will be encouraged, US deterrence will be strengthened, and
the anti-American regimes and movements will probably be more cautious
and less provocative. Iran, for example, has a record of behaving very
pragmatically when it faces high risks and high costs. A US victory may
have a great restraining effect on it, including on its willingness to
support and encourage anti-Israeli violence. Syria certainly will
continue with its present relatively cautious policies and will try to
restrain Hizballah. The Palestinians will probably understand that they
have to be more cautious. It is also possible that the Iraqi defeat will
dampen the enthusiasm of the Palestinian extremists. On the other hand
Israel will probably feel more confident and less threatened by the
threat of escalation with Arab states. This implies that Israel will
assume that it can concentrate on the more urgent issue of the conflict
with the Palestinians.

These probable results of a US victory may create an opportunity to
effect a real change in the development of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. This could take either one of two opposite directions. One
possibility is further escalation; Israel may decide that this is an
opportunity to get rid of Yasir Arafat and the Palestinian Authority and
to re-conquer the Palestinian areas, based on the assumption that such a
complete reshuffling of the cards will improve Israel's capabilities to
prevent violent attacks on its citizens and perhaps even create an
opportunity for a new political process.

On the other hand, a US victory could create an opportunity for a new
effort to stop the violence and resume negotiations, with improved
chances of success. This will not be easy, insofar as the leaders of the
two parties are gradually losing control over the escalation, and are
locked in a vicious circle of actions and counter-actions.

The direction that the conflict takes following a successful US war
effort against Iraq depends to a great extent on the role the US plays.
US prestige and power in the Middle East will reach a peak that can be
used to resume leadership of the Israeli-Palestinian process and the
peace process as a whole-the way taken by Secretary of State Baker in
1991. The US will have to coerce the parties involved to change
direction, and will have to be willing to invest the necessary resources
and commitment for such an initiative to succeed. Recent experience,
including the post-September 11 period, shows that the two parties alone
are not capable of exploiting opportunities for a genuine reversal of
the situation.

Will American leadership rise to the challenge, or remain a passive
bystander? This is the real question.

