Back in the autumn of 2002, a senior Arab diplomat told me confidently
that United States President George W. Bush had made a solemn commitment
to the moderate Arab states: after the war in Iraq, and on condition
that Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat is pushed aside in favor of a
Palestinian whose hands are not tainted by terrorism, the US will
deliver on a peace process, as encompassed in the roadmap, even if this
means exercising pressure on Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to make
concessions.

Washington's Middle East stance has been radically transformed since
then. The US has conquered Iraq and served notice on Syria. It is
withdrawing its military from Saudi Arabia and offering the region a
free trade arrangement. And it has delivered the roadmap. Senior
administration officials proclaim that the strategic circumstances have
been altered, and that the president is now genuinely committed to
implementing a two state solution, provided that Arafat is out and
Palestinian terrorism ends.

The president's logic last autumn was based on the assumption that the
conquest and long-term occupation of Iraq would make life extremely
uncomfortable for moderate local regimes. Hence the need to compensate
them; Washington believed it could balance the negative effects of the
US presence by energizing the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.

During the course of the countdown to war in Iraq a new incentive was
added, when the administration pointedly committed to the roadmap
                                                 as a means of
bolstering leaders like Britain's Prime Minister Tony Blair whose
assistance to the US in Iraq was unpopular at home. Finally, Bush has
emerged from the conquests of Afghanistan and Iraq with his prestige and
popularity so high, that he can afford to risk a little of it on a
dangerous but important venture.

But keep in mind the president's key condition: no Arafat. Even before
Israelis elected Ariel Sharon back in early 2001, Bush's incoming
administration had registered its refusal to repeat what it perceived to
be a major mistake made by President Clinton: risking US prestige in
trying to do a deal with a Palestinian leader who could not be relied on
to keep agreements and to cease supporting terrorist violence.

Thus assuming the administration really is committed to making the
roadmap work, the Arafat factor is by definition one major potential
cause for a possible decision, when the going gets rough, to back off
from the kind of messy involvement that will be required. Palestinians
may argue that the policies of PM Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) are really
not different from those of Arafat. And the other three members of the
Quartet can make a powerful case in favor of working with both Arafat
and Abu Mazen. But in American (and Israeli) eyes these are two very
different leaders: one supports terrorist violence through cunning and
manipulation of funds; the other does not. One is not credible; the
other is.

The second potential cause for a possible administration decision to
reconsider is US domestic politics. Bush wants to win reelection in
November 2004 and to help reelect a Republican Congress. He has to be
considerate of the views of his constituents regarding an
Israeli-Palestinian compromise process. Two vital groups of Americans
upon whom he is depending for votes and campaign contributions and whose
leaders for the most part support a very pro-Israel and anti-Arab
position are the evangelical Christians and much of the organized Jewish
community. That they have begun to make common cause against those in
Washington who would pressure Israel over its disastrous settlements
policy is a disturbing development in American Jewish politics.

The Christian right is likely to stick with Bush no matter what he does
in the Middle East, because it has no alternative: it won't switch its
votes to the Democrats, who support abortion rights, separation of
church and state and other positions the evangelicals consider
abominations.

The American Jewish community, on the other hand, has an alternative. In
fact it is liberal on Israeli issues and traditionally votes Democrat.
But its leaders always support the positions of the serving government
of Israel. This gives PM Sharon a vital additional lever of influence
over the administration's policies regarding Israel; he is adept at
using it.

In the aftermath of Iraq, Bush leads in the opinion polls by a huge
margin, and elections are 18 months away. He can for the moment ignore
the protests of Jewish and evangelical leaders. He could even risk
staring down Sharon regarding some of the latter's initial roadmap
obligations. This gives the interested parties a vital window of
opportunity. The other Quartet members should recognize that keeping
Washington committed to the process for as long as possible is more
important than their activities in Ramallah and Jerusalem.

But the window is almost certain to close in six or at most ten months,
when Bush's domestic advisers sit him down and tell him that he needs to
win Florida fair and square this time, hence needs the Jewish vote and
evangelical money there, and that in order to get them he should avoid
pressuring Sharon, even if this means abandoning the roadmap until after
elections.

