Q: How do you explain the radical difference between the
fence decisions/recommendations of the Israel High Court of Justice
                                             and The Hague International
Court of Justice                                            ?

A: The subject we are dealing with is not purely judicial. As a
matter of fact, every judicial expert will tell you that you cannot
disconnect the judicial process from its social, human, and economic
environment. This is one of the cases that can demonstrate how two
independent judicial systems come to different conclusions based on the
same set of facts. The international court was constrained from the
beginning by the way the case was presented for its judgment. The
international court did not use the judicial tools that the Israeli
court used.

Q: Let's begin with the Israeli court.

A: The Israeli court used the mechanism of balancing between two
principles and rights. On the one hand, the right of Israel to defend
itself from terrorism, its right of self defense, and its humanitarian
approach that justifies measures in order to save lives--and there is no
doubt the fence has succeeded in saving lives. And on the other, the
fact that the fence caused inconvenience and damage and was a massive
intrusive element in the lives of groups of people. The question the
Israeli court dealt with was the best route to balance these two factors.

Q: And the international court?

A: The international court decided to concentrate on another issue
and deal with the fence through the question of the rights of an
occupying power. By ruling that Israel should destroy the present fence
and move it to the green line, the international court took a one-sided
and extreme decision that is political because it prefers the political
aspect over the security aspect.

Q: What could the Sharon government have done to prevent
the decisions?

A: Regarding the Israel High Court of Justice decision, they could
do nothing. Israel is a democracy committed to the rule of law, and High
Court decisions are binding for the government. In The Hague, Israel had
no chance of getting a fair and reasonable comprehensive approach to the
problem.

The whole idea of building the fence was a response to barbaric
terrorist acts. Around 1000 Israelis were killed and thousands wounded
before Israel started to build the fence. The court didn't mention this
and did not note the terrorist phenomenon, which was the only reason to
build the fence. As Israelis we can say that in spite of the
inconvenience and even humanitarian suffering that the fence has caused
to many Palestinians, it has saved hundreds of Israeli lives and the
same number of Palestinian lives: after, every suicide bomber succeeds
in taking Israeli lives, Israel responds by launching attacks on
Palestinian villages and terrorist centers that also take a toll in
Palestinian deaths.

Q: What can the Knesset and your committee do in the
current situation?

A: Our committee deals with many aspects of the Israeli presence
in the West Bank. We try to do our best to maintain human rights even in
the war against terrorism, and are supervising the conduct of the
Israeli security forces in the West Bank and trying to influence this
conduct according to morality and international law. When you are
fighting terrorism you face very complex dilemmas.

Now, after the courts have had their say, the issue becomes a political
one. We have to remember that the Israeli court decision is binding on
the Israeli government, but The Hague court decision is only a
recommendation and doesn't bind Israel. The decision will be transferred
to the international political arena, to the United Nations, presumably
by the Palestinians and their supporters. This is the next arena where
Israel will have to fight against the practical results, if there are
any, using political tools. I hope that the many democracies that
opposed or expressed reservations regarding The Hague judicial process
will now make more effort to block any attempt by the UN to impose
sanctions on Israel.

Q: Will the fence end up on the green line?

A: I don't think it's possible for Israel. The Hague court didn't
take into consideration the fact that there are many Jewish settlements
near the green line that Israel should protect. There are more than
100,000 Jews living on territory that, according to international and
Israeli law, is beyond the green line but is still under the authority
and jurisprudence of the State of Israel. Taking this position and
ignoring the political dispute is an attempt to isolate the judicial
process from real life on the ground; it risks the lives of more than
100,000 Jews that are living adjacent to the green line, for whom the
fence on its planned route is their only security guard.

We have to take into consideration that almost everyone in the area and
in the international community that has some involvement in the
continuous dialogue between the Palestinians and the Israelis knows that
under any final status agreement this dense Jewish population will be
included within the sovereignty of Israel. We are talking about
territories that constitute perhaps four or five percent of the West
Bank.

