Even prior to its ruling on the illegality of the wall, the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) was denounced by Israeli government
pundits as a "kangaroo court." After the ruling, one commentator opined,
"The court is biased," while another proudly proclaimed that the ICJ
decision                                             would "find its
place in the garbage can of history." The same stance was not, however,
taken with respect to the Israel High Court decison
                                            . Justice Minister Yosef
Lapid aptly summarized Israel's position on these two decisions: "We
will comply with our High Court decisions, and not with the
International Court, whose decision is in any case a legal opinion for
the United Nations." Herein lies the fundamental problem: Israel
reserves the right to act both as defendant and judge of any suit
against it and will not accede to independent adjudication of its crimes.

It would be easy to dismiss the decisions of the Israel High Court on
the basis of its track record. This is the same court that has failed to
outlaw completely the use of torture against Palestinians; legitimized
the presence of Jewish-only colonies built on stolen Palestinian land
(now a war crime under international law); and legitimized the
demolition of homes of suspected offenders and their families as a form
of punishment (a tactic also used by Saddam Hussein in Iraq).

Yet this decision of the Israel High Court should not be dismissed
outright. The court rightfully acknowledges that Israel is in
"belligerent occupation" of the West Bank and Gaza Strip and correctly
demands that Palestinians be compensated for Israel's illegal actions.
In an eloquent statement, the court noted, "Only a separation fence
built on a base of law will grant security to the state and its
citizens. Only a separation route based on the path of law will lead the
state to the security so yearned for."

Remarkably, despite this statement, the High Court failed to do the very
thing that it was asked to do--determine a wall route based on the law.
Why? Not because of malice on the part of the court but due to the fact
that the court is, in essence, adjudicating the very crime that its
authorizing state claims is for its benefit. "Our task is difficult,"
Justice Barak writes, "We are members of Israeli society." This
statement speaks volumes.

In determining what impact Israel's actions have on Palestinians, the
High Court examines only what is best for Israel (a country that was not
only built on the dispossession of others but has, for 37 years, tried
to expand its territory) and not the rights of the people subjugated by
Israel. In other words, the application of international law (with its
inherent principles of justice and equality) is optional, not obligatory.

Because the Israel High Court views international law as optional, it
fails to contest the military establishment's pronouncement that the
wall is necessary. More importantly, the High Court fails to adjudicate
the most important questions: Why has Israel not built the wall on its
pre-occupation border (the green line)--a shorter and more easily
defended line? What is the link between the wall and the colonies? If
the wall is truly about security, why will the proposed path of the wall
leave more than 200,000 Palestinians trapped between the wall and the
green line? It is therefore not surprising that the High Court only
confined itself to calling for moving (not removing) a mere 30 km of the
wall (less than 5% of the total length of the wall) because of the
"disproportionate injury" caused to the Palestinians.

Juxtaposing the ICJ's decision with that of the Israel High Court, one
can clearly see the far-reaching power of an independent ruling based on
international law versus one based on domestic politics. The world court
correctly pronounced on the most basic (yet disputed) issues faced by
Palestinians: that Israel is, indeed, in occupation of the West Bank and
Gaza Strip (which Israeli government officials cannot even acknowledge);
that the colonies are illegal, irrespective of whether they are in
Jerusalem or otherwise; and that Israel has flagrantly violated the law
for decades.

The world court went further than simply restating the law--it applied
it. By examining the current and proposed path of the wall, the 14-1
decision noted the following salient facts. The wall has been routed
around not only the colonies but also their planned expansion, in an
attempt to leave 80 percent of the settlers (320,000 Israelis) living in
the West Bank colonies. More than 200,000 Palestinians would remain
trapped between the wall and the green line. Of the more than
650-kilometer wall, only six percent (39 km) would be within 100 meters
of the green line. Over 16% of the western side of the Occupied West
Bank would be "de facto" annexed into Israel.

With these staggering facts, the ICJ could only conclude that the wall
built in occupied Palestinian territory is not there for military
necessity; it is there to consolidate Israel's hold on the colonies.
Though "security" is the proffered excuse, coveting Palestinian land
(and water) is the real reason behind the wall. Because the colonies are
illegal, so too is the very structure that is designed to ensure
Israel's hold on them--the wall.

Unlike the Israel High Court, the world court did not confine itself to
a mere 30 km stretch of wall. It demanded that Israel demolish the
entire wall built in occupied Palestinian territory; return the land,
orchards, and olive groves it seized to build the wall; and pay
compensation to Palestinians for all damages and losses.

The victory of the World Court decision lies not in the decision itself
but in the reframing of the conflict. No longer is this an issue of two
equal parties who cannot get along; it is about Israel's 37-year
military occupation and the inherent power imbalance. Many will dismiss
the case as "non-binding," and indeed, the decision is non-binding.
However, the decision is based on law that is binding: UN resolutions
and international humanitarian law. Accordingly, the World Court's
ruling affects not only Israel but also the international community.

Israel has, for 56 years, viewed itself as above the law and the
Palestinians beneath it. That will not change. Israel will continue to
trample on the Palestinians' rights. It will continue to build
Jewish-only colonies on Palestinian land, and it will continue to build
the wall--unless it is stopped. The real test will be not what Israel
does but what the international community will do: will it apply the
power of law or the law of power?

I recently relayed to a friend Israel's labeling of the World Court as a
"kangaroo court." "If it is," he responded, "it is only because even a
kangaroo would recognize that the wall is illegal." It is a pity that
the Israel High Court did not.

