There are two ways of looking at the demographic dimension of Israel's
conflict with the Palestinians: as a dispute between two peoples with
violently conflicting national narratives concerning their right to the
land and the nature of their societies; and as a classic north-south
encounter.

For Israeli Jews, following the collapse of the peace process and more
than three years of violence, the first dimension centers around the
perceived threat posed to Israel as a Jewish homeland by Palestinian
population growth and migration. If Jews are not an overwhelming
majority in Israel, the country will not remain a Jewish and a
democratic state--perhaps the only definition of Israel that all
Zionists can agree on. This is the key factor pushing right wing
Israelis today to embrace some sort of formula for Israeli withdrawal
from the West Bank and Gaza. It is also a cause for concern with regard
to the Palestinian Arab sector in Israel, some 18 percent of the
population, which is expected to grow disproportionately in the coming
decades.

The north-south dimension is ostensibly more manageable and less
political. Like virtually all advanced economies, Israel has reached a
degree of development whereby it requires cheap outside labor to do jobs
that Israelis don't want to do. Prior to the first intifada (1988-92)
this demand was filled by Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza.
Since then Israel has imported foreign workers from as far afield as
China, with Palestinian workers allowed into Israel only in small
numbers and when the security situation permits, and larger numbers
entering illegally.

But these arrangements have generated two demographic problems that, in
turn, nourish the first, territorial, dimension. One is Palestinian
workers who remain in the country illegally, and whose presence is
perceived by Israelis as a form of illicit "return" that derives from
the territorial dispute. A second is non-Palestinian foreign workers who
remain here illegally and begin to raise families whose presence also
affects the Jewish nature of the state.

Notably, as long as the peace process with the Palestinians appeared to
promise a reasonable political solution and the security situation was
under control, Israeli governments did very little to counter these
demographic problems and threats. Everyone assumed, however
unrealistically, that the advent of a Palestinian state would afford the
best opportunity to rationalize all the demographic problems--as if
Palestinians would not continue to enter and live in Israel illegally
and the high annual population growth rate of the Negev Bedouin would
somehow decline.

It was the collapse of the peace process and the outbreak of violence
more than three years ago that made Israelis aware of long term
Palestinian intentions to exploit the refugee/right of return issue,
illegal return, and the role of the Israeli Arab community in order to
undermine Israel demographically. And it was the security crisis posed
by the near-existential threat of Palestinian suicide bombings that led
Israel, however reluctantly, to adopt a policy of physical
separation--the fence--that appears to offer a means of at least
mitigating the demographic threat as well.

Today a large majority of Israeli Jews, left and right, seeks to use
physical barriers to keep Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza from
entering Israel. This may solve some of the demographic problems, but it
is liable to create new political ones. On the one hand we can now
contemplate orderly procedures, using advanced technology, for enabling
Palestinian day laborers to enter Israel in the morning and leave at
night, thereby to a large extent neutralizing the demographic aspect of
Israel's north/south problem and enabling it to cease dependency on
foreign workers who end up staying here.

On the other hand those Israelis, led by Prime Minister Ariel Sharon,
who think they can achieve a viable demographic and political solution
by fencing in a bantustan in 50 percent of the West Bank are only
exacerbating both problems. And since a realistic two state solution
appears to be impossible to negotiate with the current Palestinian
leadership, Israel must be very careful in carrying out unilateral
fence-building and withdrawal schemes. The fence must be on or near the
green line in order to reinforce the only conceivable permanent border;
the withdrawal must provide benefits for both Israel (security,
demography) and Palestine (land) without foreclosing any political
options or creating any new and problematic political or geographic
facts, e.g., by annexing or settling additional lands in the West Bank.

As for Israel's own burgeoning Arab population, a green line fence, or
peace, would give us a chance to address the pressing challenges of
economic and social integration and elimination of the insane financial
incentives for child-bearing that the state has been providing. At the
end of the day, less than 12 percent of the Israeli population are
Muslims, and only a portion of them cultivate a religious and political
outlook that threatens Israel from within. This is a containable threat.

Finally there is the issue of the very high population growth rate of
Palestinians in the West Bank and especially Gaza (over five percent
annually). Currently, for obvious reasons, making babies is considered a
patriotic duty for Palestinians. Palestinian economic planners hesitate
to point out that even under the best of political circumstances
economic growth will be impossible under such demographic conditions.
But eventually, in order to have a viable state, Palestinians will have
to come to terms with their own internal demographic threat. The most
Israelis can hope for is to make this largely a Palestinian problem
rather than an Israeli problem.

