Despite the Israeli government's blatant attempt to undermine the visit
of United States Secretary of State Colin Powell to the region and
Israel/Palestine, this visit marks a significant renewal of American
diplomatic efforts to replace the ongoing violent confrontations between
Palestinians and Israelis with peaceful negotiations. Israel has already
aborted that American initiative in different ways, but primarily
through its official declaration that Prime Minister Ariel Sharon will
discuss the roadmap                                                  and
offer Israel's position at his meeting with US President George W. Bush
on May 20. That leaves Colin Powell and his visit hanging in mid-air.
Without Israeli acceptance of the roadmap and willingness to begin
implementation, the exercise of Colin Powell's trip to launch the plan's
implementation has become meaningless.

That is, of course, in addition to the extraordinary Israeli escalation
of pressure on Palestinians, which seems to be aimed at inviting violent
Palestinian reactions. At this opening for peace, Israel has increased
its military operations and ended up killing more Palestinians;
tightened the closure on Palestinian towns and villages that is daily
damaging the internal infrastructure; and continued and escalated
illegal settlement expansion and confiscation of Palestinian land
through the project of the separation/apartheid wall. Palestinians
cannot be convinced that Israel is ready to abandon its occupation when
all they see around them is the occupation's physical consolidation.

The Palestinian Authority, for its part, has been trying to act
positively towards this American-proposed plan that was accepted as the
Quartet roadmap. At the same time, the Palestinians have been repeatedly
explaining that this roadmap will have a chance of success and
implementation only if Israel accepts it with no conditions or changes,
and expresses willingness to begin serious implementation as per each
side's obligations.

Thus, if this visit of Colin Powell were to mark the beginning of
comprehensive American involvement and renewal of peace efforts, then it
might be a positive sign. However, if Israeli stalling and other tactics
of avoiding engagement over this document succeed in frustrating
American Middle East diplomacy, then it is likely that the coming period
until after the US elections will witness a continuity--if not an
increase--in the violence and suffering of both Palestinians and Israelis.

The irony here is that while the Americans are dealing with the Middle
East as integral to their foreign policy, Israel is dealing with US
Middle East involvement as if it is a game of internal American
politics. Even though the Americans have sent Secretary of State Colin
Powell to the region, Israel has dodged real engagement with him and is
dealing instead with US official Elliot Abrams in secret meetings before
Powell's arrival, and conferring with White House officials after Colin
Powell leaves. All the while, Israel is influencing US policies in the
region by lobbying the US Congress to pressure the Bush administration
by signing petitions that will discourage it from moving forward with
the roadmap. Perhaps this meddling explains why even President Bush,
while giving a key May 9 address on the Middle East, could not bring
himself to utter the name of the roadmap.

