Q: Yesterday, you and other civil society leaders met with
United States Secretary of State Colin Powell. Can you describe what was
discussed?

A: First, Mr. Powell gave a statement about the American position
on the roadmap                                                 , trying
to give us confidence that the Americans are willing to work towards
this since the Iraqi war. They are pleased with the appointment of
[Palestinian Prime Minister] Abu Mazen and other things related to the
roadmap, but there are still things that remain to be done: in his
words, "uprooting terrorism."

He also said that that they asked the Israelis to implement their part,
to relieve the difficult conditions that Palestinians are suffering under.

Q: What about the Palestinian response?

A: For our part, we tried to express the difficulties of the
roadmap versus people's expectations that this time things might go
forward. There were several maps given to him, one showing Israeli
settlements and how they are dividing the country and depriving
Palestinians of their right to build a state that has continuity. The
settlements, in fact, are putting a final status agreement at risk and
our fear is that the transitional state that is part of the second phase
of the roadmap will also putting the final status at risk. The Israelis
might use this as a defacto final status, as was done during the Oslo
accords.

Also, there was another map that showed that settlements and bypass
roads [connecting the settlements] give continuity to the Israeli state
and integrate the settlements into Israel, which also threatens the
final negotiations. Another map on settlements showed that there are
some "political settlements" that might be dismantled in the first phase
[of the roadmap]. There are only 14,000 Israeli settlers living there,
but this would make a big difference [for us].

We worry about the relationship between democracy, and supporters of
peace who believe that Abu Mazen can deliver something. If their
expectations are not met, then they will be frustrated and believe there
is no future, which puts the peace process in danger.

Q: How did you feel these comments were received?

A: He didn't talk very much; he was mostly listening.

Personally, as I read the roadmap and compare it with the different
experiences that we have had--starting with Oslo, then the Wye River
Accords, and all these agreements, I feel that Palestinians are always
getting less than we had before. Palestinians always have to lower their
expectations. Who will be monitoring this situation? The partners are
not on equal ground.

Q: If you feel that the roadmap is just one more concession
by the Palestinians, do you think that Palestinians have any other
choice other than to work with it?

A: No. We are not rejecting the roadmap, but I cannot say that we
are accepting it as it is. If the roadmap is going to end the conflict,
there are some things that should be discussed. We have to look at the
implications of the establishment of the state of Israel on the
Palestinians. Just one of these implications was the creation of the
refugee problem. How can that be solved?

The people as a whole, as well as individuals, have a right to decide
what they want to do about this. If we take look at it from a
perspective of peace, then it is easy to solve the refugee problem
without endangering the state of Israel. Israel has to accept the right
of return, but the modalities of the right of return can be discussed.
Palestinians are still living as refugees, not only outside historic
Palestine, but there are also 22 refugee camps in the West Bank and
Gaza. These people live in misery.

How can we solve that problem, and that of the refugees in Jordan and
Lebanon and Syria? For 60 years, many of these people have been living
without citizenship and without rights.

