When Palestinian President Yasser Arafat was released from his
confinement to his Ramallah compound, he was probably expecting
different challenges than those that have emerged. He was probably
expecting challenges resulting from Israel's effective cancellation of
Palestinian security control over areas designated as such under the
Oslo agreements. He might have also been thinking of the trials of
rebuilding his security and civil institutions and other infrastructure
damaged in the Israeli reoccupation of his country.

Instead, he emerged facing the test presented by Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon and United States President George W. Bush: demands that he
alter the structure of the Palestinian Authority. Further, Arafat's own
people confronted him angrily on the issue of reform in the very first
cabinet meeting after his Ramallah release.

The Palestinian public and leadership view with great suspicion and
hostility demands that come from "the enemy" for changes in the
Palestinian leadership structure. These impositions are perceived as a
way for Israel to influence the Palestinian people's choice of
governance as they live under a foreign military occupation. They are
also seen as one way for Sharon to realize the political objectives of
his military campaign. Palestinians have not forgotten the previous
decades of occupation in which the Israeli government tried repeatedly
to impose an alternative, collaborative leadership against the will of
the Palestinian public.

But Sharon is probably not even that serious in his calls for reform.
His motive is likely the implementation of another excuse for avoiding
any serious Palestinian-Israeli political process. Sharon has said that
no political discussion or resumption of talks can take place without
changes in the structure of the Palestinian Authority. He certainly
knows that this condition will never be met because the occupied
Palestinian people will never allow their foe to force them to change
their leadership structure. And so Sharon is maneuvering to avoid
entering a political process that will unmask the contradictions between
his political and ideological positions, on one hand, and the terms of
reference of the peace process, on the other. He wants to avoid the
yawning chasm that will subsequently be exposed between his political
positions and those of the United States in the Middle East.

Palestinian demands for reform have different roots, but are no more
likely to reap results. Non-official circles of thinkers, academics,
political parties and civil society players are sincere about reform and
have done many studies on what is really required to overhaul the
Palestinian political system. But these groups are powerless in the
absence of regular, free and democratic elections.

On the other hand, powerful officials, especially members of the cabinet
and leadership of the Palestinian Authority and Palestine Liberation
Organization, launched a campaign in the first meeting of the
presidential cabinet after the Israeli invasion. Their demands are
notably not sincere and are rather part of a current power struggle.
Sometimes, they are intended to cover up individuals' own involvement in
political and fiscal corruption.

The hidden story of Palestinian official calls for reform is that during
the siege on President Arafat, there was suddenly an imbalance in roles
played by different people and groups in the Palestinian leadership.
Elements in the leadership began to have a very prominent media and
political role at the expense of others. All this was very threatening
to the majority, which appears to have expressed opposition to the
change by pressuring Arafat for reforms.

The litmus test for any calls for reforming the Palestinian political
system and their significance or seriousness is whether they include
calls for regular, free and democratic elections that will empower the
public and enforce accountability, transparency and efficiency.
Otherwise, any changes are going to be the flawed product of the same
people that are responsible for the current situation.

The means of judging demands for reform, whether they emanate from
Washington or Tel Aviv or come from Jerusalem, Ramallah and Gaza, is how
they incorporate the Palestinian demand for comprehensive and free
elections.

