UN General Assembly Resolution 181
                                            was passed in November 1947.
The first internationally accepted partition plan of Palestine
apportioned the land in about equal measure to a future Palestinian-Arab
state and a Jewish state, both of which were to have consisted of three
cantons, Jerusalem would have been under international administration,
and the two states would have economic unity, including a common currency.

The British government called in the UN to settle the "question of
Palestine" in 1947. The British took the issue before the General
Assembly as a conflict between two communities, the Arab Palestinians
and the Jews. In doing so, they presented the British Mandate Authority
as neutral. In fact, their hope throughout this period was that the
General Assembly would prolong the British mandate.

The UN decided to hold a special session devoted to the issue in April
1947, a meeting that resulted in the advent of the UN Special Commission
on Palestine (UNSCOP). UNSCOP was comprised of representatives from 11
member states and came to Palestine in July 1947 to meet all the
concerned political parties. The Palestinian side boycotted the
commission, a position imposed by the then Palestinian leadership under
Haj Amin al Husseini. As a result, no single Palestinian faction met the
commission, although the Arab Liberation League (ALL), the forerunner of
the Palestinian Communist Party, had intended to. Under pressure, the
ALL changed its mind on the pretext that it did not want to cause any
split in the national ranks at that critical time. The party did,
however, send a memorandum to the UN entitled "The Way to Freedom for
Palestine" describing the situation as it saw it.

At the beginning of September 1947, UNSCOP came out with its
recommendations. The majority suggested partition, while the minority
opinion wanted a single democratic Palestinian state for Arab
Palestinians and Jews. On November 29, the General Assembly adopted the
majority partition plan.

Not long after the resolution was adopted, violence erupted between the
Palestinian and Jewish communities. This violence was provoked and
encouraged on the one hand by the British Mandate Authority, still
hoping to prolong its mandate, and by a well-prepared and well-equipped
Zionist movement on the other. The Palestinian leadership played its own
not insignificant part.

The British took certain measures to intensify the clashes. On January
15, the British Mandate Authorities shut down Al Ihtihad newspaper, the
paper of the ALL. Al Ihtihad was the only newspaper that had foreseen
the likely outcome of the violent confrontations. In its articles and
editorials, the paper worked to prevent the Palestinian people from
taking part in the confrontations, and advocated acceptance of the
partition plan. Even though Palestinians felt the plan to be unjust, the
paper reasoned that to have an independent democratic state in part of
Palestine would be better than to have no state at all. It also saw
acceptance of UNGAR 181 as the only way to avoid what was to become the
Palestinian catastrophe: the exile of over half the Palestinian people
from their homeland.

The party the paper represented only followed belatedly. In February
1948, the Arab Liberation League changed its long-standing position in
support of one democratic state for Jews and Palestinians alike, and
adopted the partition plan. It was the only Palestinian party to
formally accept UNGAR 181. The rest of the Palestinian factions were
under the tight control of a conservative and autocratic Haj Amin al
Husseini, who had always advocated an independent Palestinian Arab
state, where the Jews present before 1918 and their descendants had a
right to stay because of their ancestry while those who arrived later
would have to return to their countries of origin.

It came down to pragmatism. The Zionist project was a colonialist
project. The 1917 Balfour declaration and the subsequent immigration
into Palestine had as its explicit aim to create an alien entity in
Palestine at the expense of the indigenous population. In principle it
was wrong for Palestinians to go along with it in any way, shape or
form. In practice it might have avoided the Nakba that Palestinians are
still suffering from today.

But despite its pragmatic stand, the British authorities took
administrative measures to shut al Ihtihad down, and only five days
later, on January 20, the British government declared it would give up
all its security responsibilities, urging both sides to take measures to
defend their respective communities. It was a clear indication that the
British would not stand in the way of the violence. The British were
hoping that a conflagration of the violence would force the UN to extend
the British Mandate.

On September 16, 1948 Count Folke Bernadotte, who had been mandated by
the UN to mediate a solution between the warring factions based on UNGAR
181, publicized his report. He proposed to redistribute the territory,
with the Negev becoming part of an Arab state, crucially not a
Palestinian state, but a greater Jordanian one, while the Galilee would
become part of a Jewish state. It was a plan that would have suited the
British well, providing territorial contiguity between the Suez Canal
and Jordan all of which was under British control. But the plan never
came to fruition and Bernadotte was assassinated the very next day,
apparently by Jewish terrorists under the leadership of Yitzak Shamir, a
later Israeli prime minister. UNGAR 181 finally died with the Swedish
envoy.

While no one talks of UNGAR 181 any longer, lessons have been drawn from
the experience. Most importantly, during the 19th session of the
Palestinian National Council in Algiers in 1988 the Palestinian
leadership adopted the so-called declaration of independence envisaging
a state on the land occupied in 1967. Considering that that land is less
than half of the land promised a Palestinian state by UNGAR 181 the
decision was a very serious compromise in favor of peace.

The Palestinian people have also learned from the period that their
greatest weapon is their presence. Israel has always wanted the land
without the people. That is the single most important reason the
territories occupied in 1967 were not annexed. Only east Jerusalem was
annexed, at a time when the Palestinian population of this "unified
Jerusalem" constituted 27 percent of the total population. Despite the
best attempts of the Israeli authorities and the influx of new Jewish
immigrants, Palestinians now constitute 33 percent of the city.

