Q: The original economic agreements between Israel and
the Palestine Liberation Organization were based on the idea of
integrating the two economies. In hindsight, do you feel that was a good
idea?

A: I think given the constraints at the time, there wasn't much
that we could have done better.

Q: When you look forward towards future negotiations,
then, do you see other arrangements being made?

A: There are several ways to improve on what was achieved in the
past, but we have to remember that the political setting has changed
immensely. The physical setting has also changed dramatically. I don't
think that we have arrived yet at the starting point for our future
discussions.

There are new realities on the ground and we will have to work a lot
harder and imaginatively to arrive at something tangibly different. But
that does not mean it will be better--it will be far more complicated,
far more security-oriented and definitely the magnitude of economic
relations between the two sides will be a lot smaller than it was years
ago.

Q: Can you give some concrete examples?

A: The most important components of economic cooperation between
Palestine and Israel during the past years, especially after Oslo, are
employment and trade. As you probably know, for several years after the
outset of the peace process, wage remittances contributed significantly
to the Palestinian income, at the rate of some 30 percent of the GNP.
Some 35 to 40 percent of the labor force was directly employed in
Israel. This is one area where we cannot go back to where we were. We
will have to try to structure or initiate some sort of labor relations,
but I do not expect the Israelis will accept a free flow of workers from
the Palestinian territories across the green line.

The same is true in regards to trade. For the past ten years or so,
Israel accounted for more than 90 percent of our exports. It was by far
the most important destination for our exports. Again, the security
implications of trade are important and I think that we will have to
structure these relations on new grounds. Definitely, it will be more
difficult to move commodities from the Palestinian territories to
Israeli markets.

Q: In terms of the customs relationship that has been in
effect, do you see that continuing despite the physical barrier that is
being constructed between the West Bank and Israel?

A: In theory, and even in practice in many countries, the mere
presence of a physical border does not imply that a customs union is
impossible. But I do not think that now we can realistically expect a
customs union in the near future.

On the other hand, both sides realize that trade between them is very
important. It is simply hard to do it. The question of security--or what
is described as "security", as the Israeli side has a terribly inflated
sense of what security means here--Israel can always say that because of
security, they cannot let this shipment through and so on. I think it
would be possible to have a new arrangement whereby the question of
security inspection is conducted by modern technology. Otherwise, one is
likely see a flow of goods in only one direction--from Israel to Palestine.

Q: In the short term, the restriction of movement, the
building of this wall, are all devastating the economy. Is there
anything that Palestinians can do themselves to alleviate this situation?

A: I think the question of the wall has not attracted adequate
attention at the international level. I think that Palestinians have to
struggle harder to oppose the wall. It is very clear that the wall is
not only a security invention, it is a political border that does not
coincide with the armistice line that was recognized as the dividing
line between the territories. The new wall is in several places several
kilometers east of the real border. We all know that the wall has been
installed taking into consideration political and economic and water
issues. I don't see any real reaction to the wall project at the
international level, in fact not even at the Palestinian Authority
level. They have to take it much more seriously and take it to the
Security Council.

Q: Can you give a general picture of the Palestinian
economy and where it is going?

A: We have all heard all kinds of figures about the economic
impact of the Intifada and the corresponding Israel sanctions. It is
quite clear that living standards have dropped dramatically.
Unemployment is in excess of 55 or 60 percent. Poverty is well in excess
of 60 percent and in Gaza, it must be in excess of 75 percent.
Businesses are in very bad shape and an increasing number are rendered
insolvent.

Banks are suffering and, despite the advantage of several years of good
business and huge reserves, they are now in very bad shape because of
the difficulties encountered by their customers. I am afraid that the
Palestinian banking system is literally shaking now. It would be a shame
if we witnessed a collapse of the banking system, like the private
sector at large. The Palestinian Monetary Authority is monitoring what
is going on and taking very tough measures, but banks are suffering and
if things stay as they are now--anything could happen.

