The Palestinian presidential campaign became tangibly less exciting
after the withdrawal of Marwan Barghouti, the only candidate that
presented a serious challenge to the main Fateh candidate Mahmoud Abbas
(Abu Mazen).

Barghouti's withdrawal itself, however, is significant, because it
indicates that there has been a retreat in the political tendency he
represents. A recent public opinion poll, which showed that Marwan ran a
close second to Abu Mazen in the race, also showed a very clear
de-radicalization in several aspects of Palestinian public opinion.

The poll found an increase in optimism over the future, a decline in
support to military attacks by Palestinians against Israelis, and an
increase in those who support the two-state as opposed to those who
support the one-state solution.

In addition, the performance of political groups and public institutions
has continued impressively. The process has gone strictly according to
the book so far, and everyone is still committed to elections as the way
to decide on the new leadership. The close attention paid to the rules
and legislation has also increasingly earned the respect of observers,
especially as it is happening in spite of continuing Israeli efforts to
make this process difficult.

Israel, until now and in spite of assurances to the contrary, has not
allowed the resumption of the voter registration in East Jerusalem as in
the rest of the occupied territories. So far, there is no reason to
think Israel will allow voting in East Jerusalem to proceed with ease.

The campaigning and political activities that should accompany any
election process are still subject to the same restrictions on movement
that everyone is affected by everywhere in the occupied territories.
Public activists and presidential candidates have been subject to
harassment and arrest. In addition, Israel persists with its campaign of
terrorizing civilians and arresting and assassinating activists,
unnecessary activities that only create an atmosphere not conducive to
elections.

The international community, which claims to be very enthusiastic about
the idea of elections, is not doing much in order to help create any
conducive atmosphere. There has been no strong and effective effort to
convince or pressure Israel to leave the Palestinians alone for
elections. Suspiciously, the international community is not even doing
enough to allow for this process in East Jerusalem.

It is obvious is that the only party that is really serious and
desperate for free and democratic elections is the Palestinian people.
At all levels in society, this is only logical. Anyone vying for
leadership understands that the greater their legitimacy, the greater
their strength and power, and this legitimacy can only come through
elections.

But if this enthusiasm for the democratic and legal process, together
with a de-radicalization within public opinion and a moderate and
forthcoming attitude from any new leadership, is not going to move the
Palestinian people substantially toward their legitimate objective of
ending the occupation, then only the opposition camp and the radicals
will be able to call the shots in the future.

