The death of the historical leader Yasser Arafat has left a dangerous
political vacuum that the Palestinian people now have to find the best
possible way to fill. Presidential elections are one of the ways being
pursued to fill this vacuum and to establish a new source of legitimacy
for a Palestinian leadership, whether from Arafat's party (Fateh) or
from outside it.

Arafat, who did not care much about involving the political institutions
in the decision-making process, owed much of his legitimacy to his
charisma, his use of symbolism and his populism. His charisma was in
large part due to his ability to be one of the people: he lived a
spartan lifestyle and spoke to people in a language shorn of any
affectation. His life was representative of the suffering of the
Palestinian people: he, as they, was exiled from one Arab city to the
other and marginalized and persecuted by all Arab regimes. He was also
adept at using symbolism: the kefeyya, the military uniform, and the
discourse of pain, sacrifice and return all resonated strongly with
millions of Palestinian refugees and exiles. After his return to the
homeland, Arafat did not try to change the basis of his legitimacy and
was thus not interested in building viable Palestinian political
institutions. The lack of such institutions explains why his death
caused such anxiety among the Palestinian people.

Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), who is part of the remaining historical
leadership, has not got, and seemingly does not want, the same sources
of legitimacy as Arafat. Abbas speaks his mind even if it isn't popular;
he avoids symbolism and dresses in a western-style suit. A wealthy man,
he does not pretend to represent those who suffer among the poor. He
wants to base his legitimacy on general suffrage, or sound democratic
rules, and the involvement of political institutions, in particular
those of Fateh. As a strategy to deal with the Israeli occupation, he
advocates negotiations and does not offer an alternative should such a
strategy fail to achieve national aspirations.

Abu Mazen has been strongly challenged by a younger leader whose appeal
rests on similar bases to Arafat. Marwan Barghouti presents himself, not
only as the representative of the poor and marginalized refugees, but
also of the historically neglected peasants from whose ranks he comes.
His flamboyant discourse of challenge, resistance, sacrifice and
negotiation resembles that of Hamas, but with secular connotations. This
discourse finds a ready audience among poor youth, in particular those
in Fateh who have often been treated as mere fuel for the maneuvers of
the political leadership.

Even though Barghouti has now stood aside, he nevertheless represents a
strong political current within the ranks of Fateh. His is the Fateh of
the masses as opposed to the Fateh of the elite; the Fateh youth versus
Fateh's historical leadership; Fateh the militant versus Fateh the
diplomat; and Fateh the poor versus Fateh the rich.

And in an attempt to win the internal battle between the two Fatehs and
challenge the traditional leadership by bringing into question their
legitimacy within the party, Marwan is calling for internal Fateh
elections at all levels. He is thus using the presidential election as a
form of primary for the contest within Fateh, and in doing so
highlighting the fact that Fateh's "official choice" to run for
president (Abu Mazen) did not undergo a rigorous process of selection
from among the party's base. He acts as a reminder to the national
political institutions and representatives that their legitimacy derives
from their popular base--an important contribution to the Palestinian
political system.

The harsh reaction of "official" Fateh against Marwan's candidacy would
seem to be an attempt to undermine those who want to establish their
legitimacy on a sound democratic basis. The desire to represent Fateh
with one voice is essentially undemocratic. The party has different
political currents within it. Allowing these differences to surface, in
this case through a second presidential candidate, is a healthy
democratic step, though it may be destructive to the party itself.

Furthermore, sound popular backing will importantly provide the elected
leader greater legitimacy to face the coming regional and international
pressures. This will be necessary in any dealings with Israel, which is
adept at using the "threat" of a strong right wing to tie the hands of
Israeli negotiators and shrug off international pressure. That is also a
reason the traditional practice of downplaying differences within Fateh
might not be the best way to deal with internal opposition.

Outside Fateh, the withdrawals of Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the PFLP from
the presidential race leave more room to independents. Mustapha
Barghouti portrays himself as the representative of a 'third way',
neither political Islam nor Fateh's mainstream nationalism. Instead,
Barghouti, aware of the importance of the discourse of resistance and
sacrifice, seeks to build his source of legitimacy on non-violent
popular resistance as manifested in the mobilization against the Israeli
separation wall. Understanding also the importance of the role of
international public opinion, Barghouti has highlighted his ability to
address that sector, on the formal and informal levels, as a way to
boost his domestic standing and in an attempt at building a power base
among the "silent independents" and the youth, as well as those
dissatisfied with Fateh or Hamas' policies, whether they be in the
business sector or professionals.

Barghouti is also taking a leaf out of Hamas' book. By utilizing
networks he developed from his work in the Medical Relief Committees, an
influential NGO in the health provision sector, Barghouti hopes to
transform his erstwhile service recipients into an organized
constituency. It is important to note that the bureaucracy, networks,
leadership and strategy needed to run an NGO are different than those
needed to build a political movement or organization. The latter is
based on shared goals, voluntarism, sustainable commitments and
well-coordinated collective action. If he is successful in this project,
Barghouti's example might set an important precedent for the many NGOs
in the Arab world to transform themselves from urban elite NGOs into
popular movements, whether social or political ones. In doing so, they
may be finally able to obtain some real political power and compete with
both the Islamic movements and ruling parties.

