Q: In retrospect, was UNGAR 181
                                            a wise decision in your view?

A: From my point of view it was an inevitable decision. It
was in line with the solutions current in that period, the British
tradition of partition to resolve ethnic conflicts in India, Ireland,
etc. It was fashionable. It was inevitable because it was a legitimate
way of declaring war. The British left, knowing partition would not be
implemented, so UNGAR 181 legitimized the beginning of hostilities,
enabling the Jews to profit and get more than their share of Palestine.
Nothing of UNGAR 181 was implemented, not the borders, not the economic
union, not the provisions that safeguarded the interests of Palestinian
inhabitants on a par with Israelis; we tend to forget that within the
181 Jewish state there was an almost equal number of Arabs and Jews.
There were provisions to forbid confiscation of land. So UNGAR 181 was a
dead letter from the beginning. Later a myth developed that the Jews
accepted it and the Arabs rejected it. But the Jews never accepted to
honestly implement it. The main aspect of partition rejected by the Jews
was the internationalization of Jerusalem.

Q: Still, the Arab states officially rejected UNGAR 181.

A: This was their mistake. But this has become a myth to
buttress the justice of the Israeli clause, like the myth that Barak
offered the Palestinians everything at Camp David and they rejected it
and caused a war. So UNGAR 181 is an example of historic compromise only
in principle, not in reality.

Q: Are you arguing that the idea of partition into two
states was a mistake?

A: With hindsight the answer is no. Let's assume the United
Nations enforced the federation solution, the minority recommendation,
instead of partition. That would have been disastrous for the Jewish
people, there would have been no Jewish state, there would have been
one-man, one-vote.

Thinking about it today, with the failure of the idea of partition, now
that the demographic/ethnic proportions are the opposite of then (at
present Jews are a majority, then the Arabs were a majority), it's safer
to think in terms of a federated state or at least to give it a try. The
fashion is no longer partition. Then, after WWII, world borders were
fluid. Now the international borders are rigid, and the international
community is more prone to think in terms of soft internal boundaries
and federated states. So today maybe we should reopen the dilemma of
1947 and adjust it to the present situation.

Q: Were the 1947 borders--the Bosnia-like partition map of
interlocking cantons--viable?

A: They were not meant to be implemented. Especially in
Jerusalem, Jaffa, western Galilee--the triangles and points where the
cantons merged. Bosnia is a good example of a successful decision to
maintain old rigid international boundaries but with soft borders
inside. Had UNGAR 181 been implemented like at Dayton by the
international community after a terrible war it could have worked. But
this did not happen. Instead, the Jews saw UNGAR 181 as an opening to
legitimize their state and expand. Ben Gurion said as much: this is what
we take now.

So if you think in terms of bi-zonal confederation as in Bosnia or
Cyprus the answer is yes, the borders were viable. For this you need an
atmosphere of cooperation and agreement to demographic status quo and
this was not the case. Instead, one side (the Arabs) was weak and
militarily aggressive, while the other was dynamic, wanting to bring
millions of Jews to Israel, based on the UNGAR 181 foothold. The raison
d'etre of the Jewish acceptance of the partition plan was a Zionist plan
to expand. We should be proud that we strategically won that diplomatic
battle and made it the foundation of a state. But we did not, as the
myth says, accept a compromise while the other side rejected it. The
objective of UNGAR 181 was not to solve the conflict from the Jews'
point of view, but rather to create a Jewish state as a safe haven for
victims of the Holocaust. The rest is commentary.

Q: UNGAR 181 has returned to Israeli parlance in the last
few years, in the context of the peace process, because it provides the
international legal foundation for Israel as a Jewish state. Suppose the
Arabs had accepted it in 1947.

A: If we suppose the Arabs embraced UNGAR 181, this would
mean an internationalized Jerusalem, the 1947 borders, equal rights for
Palestinians in the Jewish state, near demographic parity, and Jews
forbidden to expropriate Arab lands. This is a typical ahistoric
question, because it is trying to invoke something that was meant to
deal with an entirely different situation of 57 years ago, so much so
that in 1948 people like me were for partition, and now we support a
federated state--just to show how things have changed.

