The end of the Arafat era presents unprecedented opportunities for
change both in Palestinian society and for relations with Israel. But
progress depends on the nature of the new Palestinian leadership, and
the range of plausible scenarios extends from chaos, civil war and
"Hamastan", to a democratic government promoting pragmatic compromise.

Compared to Arafat, the team of Mahmoud Abbas and Ahmed Qurei presents
an image of responsibility and pragmatism, without embracing "martyrdom"
and incitement. Although both were close associates of Yasser Arafat
during decades of terror, and Abbas once promoted Holocaust denial, in
the past two years he criticized Arafat's policy of violent
confrontation, albeit for pragmatic rather than moral reasons. Under
their leadership, the first few weeks of the transition were relatively
calm, with limited internal violence and no suicide attacks against
Israeli civilians, although the potential for terror and violence
remains high, as reflected in the December 12 bombing of an IDF outpost
in Gaza along the Egyptian border. In response to the overall improved
atmosphere, Israeli security forces took steps to lower friction. This
is still a long way from stability and an end to four years of terror
and response, but such steps at least point in the right direction.

The presidential elections scheduled for January 9, 2005 will mark an
important milestone in expanding this hopeful beginning. This is an
entirely Palestinian affair, and Israeli involvement to promote a
particular outcome would be counterproductive. But Israelis are not
indifferent--the results will have a major impact, and could mark the
first real example of Arab democracy in action. However, if Abbas and
the Fateh organization manipulate the process to ensure continued
control, they will lack the legitimacy necessary to bring stability to
Palestinian society. This will also prevent firm action to end
rejectionism and violence, including dismantling of terror organizations
such as Hamas and the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades.

>From this perspective, Marwan Barghouti's on-again off-again candidacy
added an extra complication. Before Barghouti's central involvement in
the terror campaign (for which he was convicted by an Israeli court on
five counts of murder), he was seen by many as the best hope for
transforming Palestinian society. Unlike Abbas and Qurei, who lived with
Arafat in Tunis before the Gaza process, Barghouti was a local leader of
the 1987 intifada, and has many years of pragmatic experience in dealing
with the realities of Israeli society. Barghouti's youth and charisma
contrast sharply with the "grayness" of the old Fateh leadership, which
is also heavily tainted by the graft and corruption characteristic of
Arafat's inner circle.

But Barghouti is in jail, closely associated with the past four
traumatic years of violence and extremist rhetoric. No conceivable
Israeli government will negotiate with a murderer convicted through due
process of law, and a politically based amnesty is not on the agenda.
Thus, a Barghouti victory would have frozen hopes for renewing the
dialogue aimed at political compromise.

Barghouti's candidacy was also an expression of Palestinian political
demands for the release of terrorists in Israeli jails--a position that
is unacceptable to the majority of Israelis. During the Oslo period,
there were a number of instances in which Israel agreed to release
prisoners responsible for terror waves, only to see the former prisoners
launch more attacks. Israelis also dismiss attempts to portray Barghouti
as the Palestinian Nelson Mandela (a title once given to Arafat) as part
of the broader political strategy aimed at delegitimizing Israel as an
"apartheid state". This is simply rejectionism in a different package.

Another important factor is the degree of participation, which is
relevant to the question of legitimacy. If Hamas and other radical
groups do not participate, and the Fateh organization uses the elections
to maintain control in a closed system following the standard Middle
Eastern "pseudo democratic" model, there is no chance for real change.
In such a scenario, an Abbas victory could simply serve to resume the
violent power struggle between the different factions, with little
ability to move out of Arafat's shadow on core issues such as refugee
claims and Jerusalem, even in the long term.

Thus, although the post-Arafat era and the Palestinian elections offer
the possibility for important and positive change, this outcome depends
on overcoming major obstacles.

