The belief in the need to impose a temporary government on the
Palestinians is based on the following judgments about underlying facts.

The existing regime by its nature--and as demonstrated by its
record--will never be interested in making a real peace with Israel
based on an acceptance of the legitimacy of two peoples with valid
claims to this land.

The existing regime is less concerned with the interests or wishes of
the Palestinian people than with its effort to destroy Israel, and will
resist with force any internal opposition or efforts at fundamental reform.

The deep corruption of the regime makes economic development virtually
impossible.

The regime's commitment to inciting hatred of Israel and Jews, through
lies and other deception, which is part of its strategy for staying in
power, is incompatible with movement to peace.

The regime is steeped in terrorism, which is criminal and unacceptable.
There is little room for separating internal terrorism from external
terrorism. The Palestinians must have a government that is not involved
in terrorism. There needs to be a clean break with terrorism.

Particularly because of the intensity of the conflict with Israel, and
the outside support that has been given the current regime, it is
essentially impossible for Palestinians to remove the current regime.
Potential opponents, or alternative leadership, will not come forward
until after Yassir Arafat and the current regime are removed.

What is needed is an outside group to organize a temporary government to
handle the day to day affairs of the Palestinians for an interim period
of something like three years, by analogy to the experience of Germany
and Japan after World War II. During this interim period the Palestinian
people could gradually develop civil and political institutions that
could begin a democratic political process to create a Palestinian
government that could negotiate with Israel. Meanwhile security
requirements will only permit arrangements that are much more burdensome
for Palestinians.

This discussion is based on the proposal made by Minister Natan
Sharansky summarized in his article, "Where Do We Go From Here" in The
Jerusalem Post on May 3, 2002. But other forms of this approach might be
as good or better.

Sharansky proposes that something like an Interim Palestinian
Administration (IPA) be created by a commission composed of the United
States and the Arab states that recognize Israel, excluding individuals
who have been involved in terrorist activities. The IPA will be
committed to freedom of expression and organization, to ending the
teaching of hatred and falsehood, and to ending the maintenance of
refugee camps designed to perpetuate grievances. While the
responsibilities of this interim administration would include normal
police functions, Israel would retain security responsibility and would
be expected to take whatever reasonable measures are necessary to
prevent attacks on Israelis. This enables the foreign governments to
avoid having to take responsibility for controlling Palestinian terrorism.

Today it is clear that the great majority of Palestinians support the
Palestine Liberation Organization/Palestinian Authority program of
terrorism against Israel, and its preference for a continuation of the
war over a two-state solution that fully accepts Israel. Palestinians
support Arafat against Israel--even though many have doubts about
various aspects of his regime. The idea of an interim administration is
that these popular Palestinian positions may also be partly the result
of the suppression of contrary opinion, frustration with a corrupt (and
partly "foreign") leadership, large scale incitement and teaching of
false information by official agencies and the controlled press, as well
as in the schools, and thus the absence of an open debate.

Also the current high level of hatred and desire to continue the
struggle to defeat Israel may be in part the result of natural anger and
resentment at the measures Israel is forced to take to prevent terrorist
attacks organized by the government, and the result of the hopes that
have been raised that Arab and European governments will prevent Israel
from protecting itself, and/or that division and weakness within Israel
will produce an Arab victory. Therefore it is thought that a clear end
of the current warfare, with the removal of the regime that initiated
it, and a period of open discussion, combined with an opportunity to
begin to build the Palestinian economy and civil society, free from
governmental domination, might lead to a different balance of opinions
among Palestinians and perhaps a greater chance for peace--as well as
more justice and hope for Palestinians and better living conditions.

Desirable peace agreements between Israel and the Palestinians, which
provide as justly as possible for the interests of both groups, can only
be implemented if there is a reasonable relationship between the two
populations and an important degree of mutual respect and trust. Most
Israelis believe that such a relationship can only be established if
there is a much greater degree of pluralism and open discussion among
Palestinians, and a Palestinian leadership that does not incite and
teach hatred of Israel. Such a relationship would also become much more
likely if there were a healthy Palestinian economy, which can only be
created if freed from political domination and corruption.

The approach presented here is only feasible if it becomes the policy of
the United States, and it will only become the policy of the United
States if there is a major change in official American thinking, a
change for which there already exists a good deal of support within the
US government.

