The lifting of the siege on the headquarters of Palestinian President
Yasser Arafat in Ramallah has coincided with an intensification of calls
for reform of the Palestinian National Authority (PNA). These calls have
not been confined to Palestinian quarters but came also from top United
States leaders, including President George W. Bush and Secretary of
State Colin Powell and Israeli leaders, namely Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon. In recent weeks, the discourse of reform has become so crowded
with strains of ideas and aims that it is easy to lose one's way over
who wants what and why.

One thing can be quickly cleared up: Sharon, who has spent most of his
energy since his election as prime minister last year on demonizing and
dehumanizing Arafat and attempting to weaken, marginalize and possibly
destroy the PNA, cannot be said to be genuinely concerned with reforming
something he loathes so much. Sharon and his government have raised the
issue of PNA reform only after they failed to rid themselves of Arafat
and dismantle the PNA in their use of siege, blockade, assassinations of
Palestinian militants, and military invasion of towns, camps and
villages. Hence the current Israeli leadership is trying, as second
best, this new tactic aimed using the issue of reform to delay as much
as possible the rejuvenation of a process of political negotiations over
a final settlement.

What Sharon means by "reform" is a process of neutralizing Arafat. What
follows is the demand to allocate him only a symbolic role and leave the
real task of governing to other, perhaps more agreeable administrators,
as well as the unification of the several Palestinian security branches
into one. In other words, for Sharon and his right-wing Likud party and
many old guards of the Labor party, "PNA reform" means Palestinians
guaranteeing the security of Israel, including its occupying soldiers
and colonial settlers, before the reaching of a final settlement.

The United States is also demanding the unification of Palestinian
security forces, as well as a more financially transparent government
that is less centralized in the hands of Arafat. That is, the US
administration, in the best colonial tradition, is using reform as a
precondition for accepting the graduation of the PNA into statehood
(and, of course, without specifying borders and other characteristics of
statehood).

For Palestinians, the idea of reform is as old as the PNA, although new
advocates have emerged in the arena following the military reoccupation
of the West Bank. The newcomers to the reform platform are mostly from
the upper echelons of the PNA bureaucracy who are now on the bandwagon
for more than one reason; some have been recently genuinely shaken by
the price paid by Palestinians in the second Intifada. This group would
like to be part of the Palestinian decision-making process, and not
simply a cover for autocracy that is apportioned responsibility for
policies it has no hand in making, including the creation of a situation
that permitted the coexistence of a number of political centers with
their own autonomous strategies and tactics that have dramatically
effected the lives of large sectors of the population.

The main concern here has been the character of the confrontation with
the Israeli military occupation and colonial settlements. It has
centered on whether to develop and strengthen the popular character of
resistance, or to use armed struggle against the occupying Israeli army
and Israeli settlers, and whether to use suicide bombing of civilians
inside Israel, or a mixture of these. Each of these strategies has its
own impact on the Palestinian cause and society, as well as on the
Israeli political scene. The leadership of the PNA has no clear vision
for defining the limits of the competing strategies of Palestinian
political factions, which have resulted in a kind of chaos that has
negatively impacted most Palestinians.

It is difficult to clearly identify those Palestinian leaders who
genuinely stand for reform within the PNA hierarchy, since many of these
have other motives for calling publicly for reform. They have, no doubt,
benefited from existing PNA structures in terms of status, material
rewards and other privileges. By riding the reform wagon, a group of
upper PNA bureaucrats seeks to keep these privileges. They know that
reform is a winning internal and external ticket, but they are limiting
their program of reform to issues that do not threaten their interests,
for example, the unification or reduction in number of security
agencies, the reduction of the number of ministers from 30 to 15 or 18
and even the formation of a "unity government" or leadership. This is an
opportunistic position that plays to internal demands for reform and
simultaneously sends signals to the external sponsors of "reform."

For most Palestinians, on the other hand, reform of the Palestinian
political system is absolutely necessary for motives contrary to those
of Israel and the United States. Reform for them is envisaged as the
separation of powers, the promulgation of a modern constitution or basic
law and the holding of presidential, legislative and local elections. A
slimmer and more effective government with credible ministers also finds
strong support. In other words, reform is envisaged as an enabling
factor for better and more effective, as well as responsible resistance
to the Israeli occupation. Palestinians, as shown regularly by public
opinion polls, want democracy, transparency and an end to mismanagement
and corruption. But they also seek first of all an independent,
sovereign and democratic state of Palestine on all Palestinian territory
occupied by Israel in 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital and a
just and fair solution to the refugee problem in accordance with
international legitimacy.

