When Yasir Arafat returned from his Tunisian exile to Gaza in July 1994,
one of the first directives he reputedly gave was to detach the nascent
Palestinian Authority (then limited to the Gaza Strip and Jericho) from
Israel economically. His advisers, in a panic, sat him down and
explained the economic and political consequences, noting that scarcely
three months earlier the PA had signed the Paris Agreement, which
integrated the Israeli and Palestinian economies under a single
(Israeli) currency, VAT, customs regime, and open economic borders that
reflected the absence of political and security borders. Arafat
rescinded his order.

The story may be apocryphal, but the point should not be lost. Arafat's
political instincts were healthy: you don't build the political and
social infrastructure of a country by subordinating it to the economy of
its stronger neighbor and recent occupier, especially when the emerging
country is Arab, the occupier is Israel, and the borders between the two
have not yet been determined. His advisers also had a point: from the
economic standpoint, Israeli-Palestinian integration was the best thing
that could happen to Palestinians.

Inevitably, it was neither political nor economic considerations, but
rather security considerations, that determined the demise of productive
economic relations between Palestine and Israel. Paradoxically, the
closer Israel and the PLO came during the Oslo years to formalizing the
existence of a Palestinian state, the more the Palestinian economy
deteriorated, first as a consequence of closures and
restrictions--instituted to counter suicide bombings--on the free flow
of labor and goods, and ultimately due to Israel's impounding of
Palestinian tax monies that it collected in the shadow of the al-Aqsa
Intifada. The only branch of the economies where some sort of close
cooperation has continued to flourish appears to be corruption.

This brings us full circle back to the nascence of the Oslo process.
With the benefit of nearly 10 years of hindsight, it appears that one of
the greatest flaws of Oslo was its conditioning of graduated progress
toward peace on close economic cooperation. From a textbook standpoint
the thinking was correct: economic cooperation would generate trust,
confidence, prosperity and interdependence--all key building blocks for
the next steps toward a two-state solution. In parallel, Shimon Peres
expanded the concept and suggested an economic "New Middle East" to
Israel's Arab neighbors.

But in terms of realpolitik, the whole approach was wrong. The
Palestinians with whom Israel negotiates cannot or will not control
their extremists, who began suicide bombings way back in 1994. Israeli
governments have not controlled the settlers, who are bent on sabotaging
peace, and who are plunging Israel deeper and deeper into a demographic
disaster for the Jewish state. The resulting negative interaction
between the two sides has meant no trust and no confidence.

The reasons are political and security-related, not economic. The
solution, too, is political and security-related: separation and fences.
The economic consequences are undoubtedly negative, but economics is not
and cannot be the dominant consideration at this stage in
Israeli-Palestinian interaction. This is what the economists don't
understand. This is why "New Middle East style" Israeli economic
interest and investment during the '90s was perceived by too many of our
other Arab neighbors (with the exception of their economists) as
neo-colonialist domination.

Ultimately, for political and security reasons unrelated to economic
common sense, Israel will get a fence and Palestinians their own
currency, VAT rate and protective customs. Palestinians will need
international financial aid to produce more products on their own, and
Israeli security experts will have to find a way to enable large scale
civilian imports to enter Palestine via Jordan and Egypt rather than
Ashdod port. Israel's lucrative annual two billion dollars worth of
exports to Palestine will suffer.

Some areas of pragmatic "invisible" economic cooperation--electricity,
fuel, water--will be able to continue, but basically Palestine will
become part of the Arab political and economic world, and its border
with Israel will be a political, security and economic border. For
better or for worse this is the only practical possibility. In any case,
the Palestinians have nowhere to go but up--things can hardly get worse
economically for them--while experience shows that any economic losses
suffered by Israel due to separation from Palestine will be compensated
ten-fold by the prosperity that follows peace.

Once the fence, and removal of settlements beyond it, stabilize the
situation, the two sides can cautiously examine ways to renew the entry
of Palestinian commuter laborers to Israel. The 30 or so abortive
economic and developmental cooperation programs outlined in annexes III
and IV to the Oslo Declaration of Principles--testimony to the grand
illusion that Israel and Palestine can turn themselves instantly into
prosperous and trusting economic partners--will, in the best case, be
replaced by a dynamic that more closely resembles Israeli-Jordanian
economic interaction. That relationship has survived the past two years
remarkably well and continues to grow--slowly, far from the media
spotlight, and as a corollary to a positive strategic relationship
between two Middle East neighbors.

