The Madrid peace conference of 1991 marked the first time that the
Palestinian-Israeli relationship changed from one of confrontation into
peaceful negotiations. That bilateral relationship was sustained
throughout the 1993 Oslo negotiations and subsequent interim
arrangements, all of which were predicated upon the coming need for
final talks on the major issues of refugees, Israeli settlements,
Jerusalem and borders. That phase of negotiations climaxed at the Camp
David summit last year, at which the Israeli side offered up an
ultimatum, thereby taking the "process" out of making peace.
Palestinians said then that more discussion might move the talks in the
right direction and that further negotiation was necessary, but that
position fell on deaf ears.

The way that the Camp David summit ended, with the Israelis saying
"take-it-or-leave-it," and the American administration pointing fingers
at Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat as responsible for the failure,
created a dangerous political vacuum and a growing tension on the
ground. The Palestinian Authority and some peaceful elements within the
Israeli government attempted to rescue events by continuing the
negotiations in Taba, Egypt. But by that time, it was clear that a
serious shift had taken place in internal Israeli politics and public.
As new elections approached, the ruling Labor government demonstrated
more and more weakness and the Taba talks lost their significance as it
became clear that the right wing would win the Israeli elections.

To the rhythm of those beating war drums, and in an attempt to gain the
sympathy of the strengthened right in Israel, the Labor government
allowed its main political opponent to do something that no Israeli
politician had ever done in the history of the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories. Arial Sharon was allowed to enter Jerusalem's
Al Aqsa Mosque, a statement of ownership that set off massive peaceful
Palestinian protests, first in East Jerusalem and later in the rest of
the West Bank, Gaza and among the Arabs in Israel. The brutal Israeli
military treatment of civilian protestors, in which Israeli snipers shot
and killed tens of young people, was the immediate cause for the
eruption of ongoing Israeli-Palestinian confrontations.

During these 16 months of confrontation, especially early on,
Palestinians tried as much as possible to maintain the popular and
peaceful nature of the clashes. Those efforts were largely in vain, as
Israeli measures kept pushing the relationship towards one of deeper,
more brutal confrontation. The number of casualties is one indication of
this trend. During the first half of the confrontations, nearly 500
Palestinians casualties were matched by some 30 Israeli deaths. Only
later would the Palestinian engagement become more lethal.

Due to these changes in the Israeli government and public opinion, it
has become clear that the negotiations era of the last ten years is one
of the past. Early on in the changing climate, Israel decided to pursue
a military option-and only a military option-against the Palestinian
side. While Palestinians know that they can never match Israel's
military might, they have been driven towards military confrontation by
Israel's use of military force and campaign of killing, home demolition
and the policy of closure. While Palestinians are facing hard times in
the court of international opinion, in particular after the events of
September 11, all history of this conflict has shown that increasing
pressure, particularly military pressure, on the Palestinians only
hardens their position. Indeed, that seems one of the objectives of the
current Israeli government, whose sole achievement has been to deepen
the hatred and hostility between the two peoples and push the chances
for peace far into the distance.

As a result of these events, most Palestinians now feel that we are in a
completely different strategic relationship with Israel. We are now on a
downward slope, rapidly moving away from the circumstances necessary for
historic compromise, and towards a place with little room for give and
take.

