The fact that there is an international consensus--conceptually at
least--that the establishment of a "Palestinian state" is a prerequisite
for peace between the Arab world and Israel is in itself testimony to
the success of the Palestinian struggle. Israel's failure to crush the
Palestinian resistance by sheer and brutal force has compelled both
Labor and even right-wing Likud to accept the futility of continuing to
deny the Palestinian political identity.

However, Israeli and American recognition of the necessity of creating
"a Palestinian state" by no means indicates genuine acceptance of the
Palestinian people's right to exercise self-determination and/or
sovereignty. Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's endorsement--even
verbally--of the words "Palestinian state" and "withdrawal" is an
important shift that cannot be underestimated; yet it is important to
scrutinize closely the practical meaning of these terms as uttered by
the Israeli government. The same applies to the United States: George W.
Bush has become the first president to commit to the establishment of a
Palestinian state following decades of American reluctance, and at times
vehement resistance, to the idea of Palestinian self-determination, let
alone statehood.

I remember asking a senior US State Department official back in 1992 to
explain the US opposition to both Palestinian statehood and
self-determination. The official, who for the next decade was involved
in the Israeli-Palestinian negotiations, explained it as follows: Such
recognition could threaten Israel's legitimacy. In other words, it would
be paramount to acknowledging Palestinians' historic rights in Palestine
and potentially raising questions about the legitimacy of the state of
Israel and how it was established.

The official went on to say that the US position could change if Israel
shifted its position. For Israel, Palestinian nationhood was long seen
as the antithesis to the Israeli identity. It implied opening the file
of the Palestinian dispossession in 1948 and the right of return of
Palestinians expelled or driven out by fear of massacres and the
fighting in 1947 and 1948. But the Palestinian intifadas of 1987 and
2000 changed the dynamic of the Israeli-Palestinian equation.

Controlling the Palestinians--even after bringing the Palestinian
Liberation Organization from Tunis with the declared goal of enforcing
Palestinian compliance with Oslo--has utterly failed as a strategy.
Initially Israel--after giving up its attempts of the 1970s and '80s to
get Jordan to represent the Palestinians--decided to deal with the
existing Palestinian nationhood by undercutting prerequisites to
sovereignty and excluding diaspora Palestinians.

As we saw throughout the Oslo process, Israel maintains the upper hand
in defining the scope, timing, and nature of its redeployments of troops
and determining the jurisdiction of a future Palestinian entity. The
continued Jewish settlement expansions, home demolitions, land
expropriations, and more dangerously, the erecting of the apartheid
wall, are all designed to ensure a fragmented Palestinian entity and
identity. This fragmentation undermines the possibility of sovereign
nationhood.

The US, in spite of shy reprimands, fully supported Israel's steps to
create facts on the ground that practically predetermined the size and
jurisdiction of a Palestinian entity. By the time Israeli and American
leaders started talking about "a Palestinian state," it was stripped of
its meaning as an exercise in Palestinian self-determination and
independence. It was reduced instead to forced Palestinian submission to
the diktats of military and political power. In his infamous landmark
"Bush Declaration                                                   ,"
the American president went further by flagrantly depriving the
Palestinians of the right to exercise their self-determination by
reducing the so-called "peace process" to an internal Israeli-American
deal in the old fashion of deciding the fate of colonized people in
closed rooms.

For the Palestinians, meanwhile, statehood has remained a dream of
liberty, freedom, and independence for which they have been struggling.
Now they are watching this dream vanish rapidly under the weight of
Israeli bulldozers, helicopter gunships, and full American endorsement
for Sharon's so-called Gaza withdrawal plan, which transforms Gaza into
a besieged strip, isolated from the West Bank.

Meanwhile, by annexing big blocs of settlements, cutting through
villages, and further fragmenting the Palestinian population with the
apartheid wall, Israel--backed by the US--has reduced the Palestinian
state to a cover for colonized, besieged "islands". The Palestinian
leadership, which was totally excluded from the negotiations, is left
with the task of controlling and preventing resistance after the Israeli
withdrawal from Gaza Strip, while at the same time deluding itself that
this withdrawal could be a prelude to genuine statehood.

