The only logical way to read the Sharm al-Sheikh summit is in accordance
with the recommendation of Ariel Sharon: "only actions and not
words--this is the only way to attain the vision of two states". We must
judge by facts on the ground and not by the verbal promises that were
disseminated. If this lesson has not been learned from the Oslo years
with their stream of promises of peace and prosperity for two states,
then why waste words?

The summit produced an admission of fatigue on the part of both sides,
however asymmetrical they are--fatigue from the bloodletting. The summit
itself featured an attempt at chumminess (Sharon inviting himself to
Ramallah, joking with Abu Ala about the fence at Abu Dis, etc.) that
created the appearance of parity between two equal antagonists who
promise from herein to behave themselves. But the moment mortar shells
began falling on the Qatif Bloc, we returned to the language of "you'll
be sorry" and the clank of tank treads. These admonitions brought us
back to the summit's real point of departure in Israeli eyes: the
Palestinians are the aggressors; they started it. Abu Mazen rose to the
challenge. He knows that the weak Palestinian position requires him to
act like the aggressor who now regrets his act.

Yet just because this is the impression enforced by Israeli superiority
doesn't make it right. The brutal, violent gap between the promises of
Oslo that the "occupation was over" and the reality experienced by the
Palestinians--of ever tighter Israeli control, direct and indirect, over
their lives and their chances to progress and develop--is what ignited
the "second intifada". If we now achieve a temporary calm due to fatigue
on both sides without eliminating the cause--the Israeli occupation of
the entire West Bank (including East Jerusalem) and the Gaza Strip--no
one can predict when that calm will end. But it will. And so will the
calm to follow.

Sometimes the absence of a reply points to the reply. From July 2005 the
Palestinian residents of East Jerusalem, carriers of Israeli IDs, will
no longer be permitted to enter Ramallah. That is when construction will
be completed on the wall and the Erez-type passage at Kalandia, deep
inside Palestinian territory. Only those who obtain an entry permit (and
experience teaches us how difficult that is) will be permitted to pass.
I asked the Prime Minister's Office and the IDF whether this doesn't
this contradict two developments: first, permission for residents of
East Jerusalem to vote in the elections for the head of the Palestinian
Authority, and second, the possibility of calm and a return to final
status negotiations. I received no answer.

That silence tells us, just as the bulldozers and the soldiers who
already prevent Jerusalem Palestinians from traveling to Ramallah tell
us, that Israel is following her plan: East Jerusalem will be separated
from Ramallah, and of course from Bethlehem. Only if those bulldozers
cease working immediately, if the soldiers immediately stop preventing
East Jerusalemites from passing through Kalandia, will we know that the
government of Israel seeks calm; that it is prepared to cease the
violence of its arrogance and domination.

According to media reports, Israel rejected the Palestinian demand
(demand? the Palestinians can demand something?) to remove the
roadblocks put up during the past four years. The message is clear: the
party that does not intend to cease building settlements cannot remove
roadblocks. After all, they are intended to ensure the safety of the
settlers and of ongoing settlement expansion. Thus only if all the
roadblocks and checkpoints are removed and the West Bank roads cease to
be strictly for Jews, will we know that Israel wants calm.

Sharon talked at the summit of "two states". Just like the Communist
Party of Israel and the Sheli Party more than 30 years ago. But when you
look at what is happening on the ground you realize that this is not a
matter of two states for two peoples but rather of 11 states: the state
of Israel, and alongside and within it the states of Gaza, Hebron,
Bethlehem, Ramallah, Jericho, Tulkarm, Qalqilya, Salfit, Nablus, and
Jenin. Each of these states is separated from the others by growing
Jewish territorial contiguity: a network of expanding settlements,
separate, highly developed and enticing road, electricity and water
infrastructure for Jews only, military emplacements, and permanent and
mobile checkpoints.

Judging by the facts on the ground today, the biggest compromise that
Israel under Sharon will accept is in the number of Palestinian states,
e.g., seven instead of 11.

