The American and British conquest of Iraq is a major historic event for
the modern Middle East. At the strategic level it will almost certainly
be seen as a positive development for Israel, insofar as a key
existential enemy, with its weaponry, is being dismantled. While it is
probably too early to analyze most of the regional and global
ramifications, it is instructive to examine some of the more obvious
linkages between the war and the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

Lest we be swept away by comparisons, it behooves us to keep in mind
that these are two separate and distinct events with radically different
roots. The first is the outcome of the policies of a megalomaniac and a
psychopath, Saddam Hussein, coupled with the American decision in the
aftermath of the attacks of 9/11 to adopt a preemptive strategy against
such rulers who threaten or defy US vital interests. The second
constitutes yet another bloody stage in the evolution of a conflict
between two peoples that claim the same land.

There are of course characteristics that link the two conflicts. Both
take place in the Middle East and involve Arab and Islamic reactions to
the perception of invasion by foreigners. A number of additional Middle
East states--Iran, Syria, Jordan, Turkey--have geographical links and/or
alliances that touch upon both conflict systems. Both involve the United
States, either as protagonist or superpower ally and potential peace
broker.

It is these characteristics that have been generating a fascinating
interaction between the two conflicts--for better or for worse.

On the positive side, a number of linkages favor Israel's interests in
its conflict with the Palestinians. Thus, suicide bombings perpetrated
against American forces in Iraq, and the inevitable tough reaction
toward the Iraqi civilian population that they engender, tend to soften
Israel's image in the eyes of international public opinion by portraying
the harsh Israeli reaction to suicide bombings within the context of an
international norm. By the same token, the US occupation of Iraq and
civilian "collateral damage" it causes there act in a way to justify
Israeli actions in the West Bank and Gaza that would otherwise be
criticized mercilessly. When an Israeli attack in Gaza that kills a
terrorist along with six innocent Palestinian civilians is relegated to
page 18 of The New York Times, the war in Iraq is definitely distracting
attention from the confrontation here.

Many of these interactions are likely to be short lived. A more durable
linkage at the strategic level appears to be afforded by Syria's
behavior. President Bashar al-Asad seems to have gone out of his way in
recent weeks and months to encourage Washington to upgrade Syria to the
Axis of Evil, alongside North Korea and Iran, the remaining targets of
US policy. He has supported the Saddam Hussein regime both in word and
in deed, by supplying weapons, hiding Iraqi weapons, allowing Islamic
Jihad and other volunteers to cross into Iraq, and providing a safe
haven for leading members of Saddam's regime.

The US reaction to these provocations is likely to include pressure on
Syria, that might otherwise have been avoided or delayed, to close down
the Palestinian and Lebanese Islamic radical terrorist organizations,
Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Hizballah, that rely on Damascus for refuge and
logistical support. This could redound favorably on Israel's efforts to
combat extremist Palestinian terrorism. An even more energetic American
response that brings about the removal of the Ba'th regime from Syria as
well, could over time conceivably facilitate a renewed peace process
between Israel and Syria/Lebanon that would serve to isolate the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict and weaken the Palestine Liberation
Organization's bargaining position, unless it has already reached
accommodation with Israel.

There remains the most obvious linkage, whereby President Bush and
British Prime Minister Blair are now calling for a concerted attempt to
implement the roadmap                                                 .
The context--the war in Iraq, Blair's political difficulties at home,
the alliance's post-war need to demonstrate to a skeptical Arab world
that its intentions are pure--is negative for both Israelis and
Palestinians. It would have been far better had Bush invested American
energies in the roadmap, or some alternative peace process, long before
9/11 and Iraq, simply because he understood this to be in the American
interest.

Instead, it is difficult to avoid the impression that the course of US
roadmap politics in the coming months will be determined by a
combination of two external developments: the vicissitudes of the
American occupation of Iraq, and Bush's calculations regarding his
reelection in November 2004. Meanwhile Abu Mazen, if and when he is
certified as prime minister, will feel obliged to avoid displaying too
much friendship for the American occupiers of Iraq, to the detriment of
Palestinian interests. And Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon will
blame Arab pressures if Bush tries to hold him to roadmap obligations,
rather than face up to the objective need to cease the settlements lunacy.

This is regrettable from every aspect. But better a peace process
generated by the conquest of Iraq than none at all.

