Q: Are Palestinians and Israelis undergoing a strategic
change in their relationship?

A: I think that with the kind of attitudes that the current
Israeli government is taking towards the Palestinian Authority,
reviewing their partnership and Oslo [peace agreements] and the PA, this
is an indication that we are on the verge of reviewing an already
changing strategic relationship.

Q: Is that trend towards the right superficial or a serious
change with drastic implications?

A: Israeli society in general has a deep propensity towards the
right. The right is linked to the notion of the existence of Israel and
this cuts across a broad base in Israeli society. Israelis, every time
they feel that there is a threat of one sort or another, drift towards
the right. There is a sense of entrenchment. The right has better
articulations and premises when it comes to the sense of entrenchment
and how to preserve the state of Israel.

Unfortunately, this current Israeli government has played on the
existential fears of Israelis and managed to drag them more and more to
the right. Remember, [Israeli Prime Minister Arial] Sharon said that he
would ensure the individual and collective security of the Jewish people
in Israel. But under his rule, there have been more casualties and
security problems than under any other Israeli prime minister. Still,
there is a drift to the right and unprecedented support for him, despite
his evident failure in preserving the security of the Jewish people.
This can happen only if you manipulate the fears of the Jewish people.

Q: What will change this drift?

A: It requires a number of things. First of all, we need a
historic Israeli leadership, a responsible leadership, a leadership that
will be able to identify the roots of the problem and not just
manipulate the symptoms and side effects. A leadership that would
recognize the roots of the matter in a just political settlement through
which the Palestinian people are recognized as equal and their rights
are recognized and addressed.

I don't think that this Israeli government is capable or is interested
in restoring the moral, balanced nature of Israeli society because that
would run counter to its scheme of things. The other factor is the
political settlement itself. If there is a political settlement through
which people feel that their rights and security are addressed, one that
would allow for healing the broken confidence between the two people,
this too would help to restore this kind of balance in Israeli society.

Q: How should Palestinians face the strategic change in the
Palestinian-Israeli relationship?

A: The margin that Palestinians have is very minimal. The
Palestinians cannot change when they are already settling for the bare
minimum that is needed for their national and material existence and
their national and material continuity. What kind of strategic changes
can they make with regard to Israel when they have already accepted
agreements and fulfilled commitments from the point of view of the
international community?

I don't think that they can respond to every unrealistic demand of
pretext that is made by Sharon and his government, demands that are
meant to undermine the Palestinian national existence and devoid the
peace process of any substance. I don't think the Palestinians are
capable of making any strategic change. In what direction? For what
reason? Their only strategic choice is to reach a settlement to this
problem with Israel through which they can regain their national rights
and live in peace with Israel, according to the bases and parameters set
by the international community--Resolutions 242 and 338 and other
principles for peacemaking.

Q: Israelis would say that if that is the case, Palestinians
should have accepted the offers of Camp David.

A: In appearance, Camp David satisfied the bare minimum, but if
you analyze it carefully, it doesn't. We are still suffering from a
vague and unfair agreement, the Oslo agreement, and we don't want to
repeat that by accepting an agreement that is not clear and does not
address the main issues of Jerusalem, the refugees, borders,
sovereignty, etc. One should not fall for Israeli propaganda that says
the Palestinians rejected 95 percent [of the West Bank]. In fact, no
issue was conclusively resolved with the Israelis. Not one single issue.

Palestinians cannot change their strategic option because their national
and material existence hinges on the kind of strategic option that they
have chosen since the beginning of the peace process. Part of this
strategic option is their commitment to the bare minimum of national
rights that enjoy Palestinian consensus--a Palestinian state within the
borders of 1967, with Arab Jerusalem as its capital; settlements as
illegal and removed and refugee problems addressed according to
Resolution 194 without prejudicing the integrity of the Jewish state.
The Israelis object to this principle because it means the undoing of
the state of Israel. We say, "No, we can exercise this principle in a
way that does not undermine the integrity of the Jewish state."

Q: Is there a military option?

A: No, this is a tactic. The Palestinians in 1988 abandoned the
military option and they committed themselves to a political settlement
and this is how the PA was established. If Palestinians have resorted to
certain options because they were squeezed into the corner and subjected
to excessive use of power and military harassment and they saw that the
only way to defend themselves was by the military means available to
them, this is another issue. This is not a strategic option.

