Q: What is your reaction as an Arab, as a Palestinian and
as an analyst to the events in Iraq?

A: It is a mixed reaction. The first part of it has to do with
the extent of foreign intervention in the region. The other has to do
with the obvious changes that are taking place in the so-called "world
order." The third has to do with the ability of a totalitarian regime to
stand for its country. These three things go in different directions,
and it is difficult to give a single comprehensive analysis.

Q: Can you explain more?

A: The war in Iraq raised a serious question about whether we are
now in a neo-imperial era or not. The idea of a superpower just going
ahead with something without United Nations decisions poses the question
for many countries: will they find themselves in the same situation in
the near or farther future?

This eventually will lead to a change in international relations and
diplomacy. The immediate results of this war will be a change towards
conservatism in the attitudes of many small countries. Opening up to the
world seems no longer of great benefit to everybody, as it was in recent
years. I think many countries will reconsider being open to UN
organizations and the world community, whether in the areas of weaponry
or economics or otherwise.

Concerning what you might call "the world order," there is now a growing
factor (it is not a new factor--it existed in the sixties and during the
Vietnam War) of massive worldwide public interest in world politics. I
think that this revitalization and its role in world politics has to be
taken into consideration. So far we haven't seen its effects on the
decision-making process, perhaps with the exception of Germany, but I
think that it will begin to be taken into consideration.

Q: In the Arab world as well?

A: This will also affect the Arab world, if you bear in mind the
third component of the analysis, which includes a situation where the
Iraqi regime could not depend on the Iraqi people to defend it. This
raises a question of how much a government can enter into conflict with
its own nation. Usually a government can count on national feelings, but
if a country like Iraq with a very strong nationalistic tradition could
not, then this poses a question for many Arab regimes: how can they
defend against external intervention by other nations?

Put together with the populist factor in world politics, slowly but
surely we will be viewing some changes in the Arab world.

Q: So you think that the civic relationship will improve?

A: It might eventually improve, but it will take a little bit of
give-and-take and some confrontation. Now everyone will have to measure
once again how far they can go, and during this "testing time," things
might happen.

Q: What about the war's effect on the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict?

A: I can't think of any major effects that can be thought of as
direct results of the war in Iraq on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
and the situation in Palestine. The widespread analysis that tries to
equivocate between the situation now and the first Gulf War is baseless,
I would say. The situation is completely different now, especially
because the situation in Palestine and in the Palestinian community is a
different one.

But the process of strangulation by the Israelis of the Palestinians has
been coming to an end. There was a question of whether Israel could
extend this further in the context of the war in Iraq, but the answer is
clear and it was "no". Now, minor changes will likely happen in the
situation here, but they should not be seen as a result of the Iraqi war.

There was previously an urgent need to do something about the conflict
and this "something" was postponed because of the Iraqi war. Now that it
is over, or when it is over, this postponement has to stop.

Q: How would you put into context Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon's comments about settlements to Ha'aretz newspaper?

A: I thought the main comments were made by the journalist, not
by Sharon. I didn't see that Sharon said anything new. The idea of
painful concessions has been repeated, the idea of agreeing with the
American administration has been there, the idea of agreeing with the
Bush speech was already there, the idea of the establishment of a
Palestinian state was also already there.

The major thing that I found interesting in this interview was the
question put as to whether the moment of truth has arrived. Sharon's
response was not negative.

The major difference now will be how the international community--and
the Quartet in particular--approaches the implementation of the roadmap
                                                . Will there be leeway
to keep the map without a map, so to speak, or will there be some sort
of enforcement for its implementation? I don't think that this depends
on Sharon's will, but on the kind of pressure that is put on Israel.

Q: Do you think that the current back-and-forth between
Syria and the United States will have an effect on the
Palestinian-Israeli track?

A: It is too early to judge. I am not sure what is behind the
tension. It might be a tactic used by the Americans to make sure that
Syria does not support or aid some sort of resistance from Syria in Iraq
that will make the life of American rule harder. There exists another
analysis that asks "who is next after Iraq?" but I don't think that it
is the right time to make such judgments. We have still not seen an
overall picture of the American attitude towards the world in general
after Iraq. It is possible there will be euphoria over winning the war,
or there could be drawbacks when it is shown that, even in Iraq, it is
not easy to control things.

