While the rest of the Arab world was experiencing a great blow to morale
after the dramatic collapse of the Iraqi army and regime, Palestinians
were having mixed feelings. On the one hand, they shared the great sense
of loss of their Arab brethren at the taking of the historic city of
Baghdad. On the other hand, Palestinian self-confidence was boosted as
they remembered their heroic resistance in invasion after invasion,
beginning with Beirut in 1982 and ending with Jenin in 2002.

What will happen on the Palestinian-Israeli track with the end of this
war is the subject of heated debate. Some analysts are saying that this
war has shifted the balance of power further against the Arabs and
consequently reduced the chances of a negotiated solution. They believe
that the end of the Iraq war will only encourage Israel's appetite to
end this conflict by force. Their line of thought says that Israel will
be spurred by the American army's disregard in Iraq for human life and
international law to carry out its own atrocities.

Their opponents, of course, argue that with the end of the war in Iraq,
the American administration and the international community will have to
balance out the regional scales by reducing damage done to their
regional positioning and credibility--i.e. by addressing the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's
statements to Ha'aretz newspaper appear to confirm this second analysis.
When Sharon spoke of possibly renewing the peace process and the need
for the Israeli public to be prepared for difficult decisions, including
the dismantling of some settlements, he indicated that he expects some
international efforts to be exerted vis-a-vis the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. He expects some pressure on Israel.

Indeed, Sharon's statements were an attempt to inoculate his government
against any imminent international pressure. One need only recall
Sharon's previous style. It is impossible to judge him and his
government on speeches offered for public consumption. Even as Sharon
talks of dismantling settlements and advocates a Palestinian state, the
military administration he commands over the occupied territories has
been expanding Israeli settlement blocs--colonies in the very heart of
the Palestinian state. The major means of augmenting these settlements
is currently the "separation wall" publicly proclaimed necessary for the
protection of Israeli civilians, but which cartographers show will
neatly slice away the majority of agricultural areas from the northern
West Bank, placing them further in Israeli hands. Speaking no less
loudly about the need to alter or "reform" the Palestinian Authority in
the name of security, Sharon has dismantled or rendered useless most
aspects of the nascent Palestinian political entity--the nucleus of a
Palestinian state.

Until the Israeli people realize that this right-wing approach is
responsible for the ongoing suffering of /both/ Palestinians and
Israelis and the evaporation of the prospects for peace and economic
prosperity, there is no opportunity for real peace. In order to shorten
the wait, the international community, led by the Quartet and including
the United States, must seize this opportunity to invite the Israeli
government and the Palestinian leadership back to the negotiating table
after convincing both of them to replace their attempts to achieve
objectives by force with peaceful talks.

