It is easy to miss the larger regional and domestic context of United
States Secretary of State Powell's mission to achieve an
Israeli-Palestinian ceasefire. Obviously, the US is worried about the
escalation in Palestinian terrorist attacks on Israeli civilians and
Israel's relatively large-scale military responses. Obviously, the US
would have liked to push the sides toward serious conflict resolution.
But these aren't the main reasons for the recent dramatic reversal in
the policy of President George W. Bush toward the level and intensity of
American mediation.

During the 2000 presidential elections and from the beginning of his
tenure at the White House, Bush said he would avoid what he defined as a
fatal mistake on the part of President Clinton of getting so personally
and intensely involved in Arab-Israeli conflict resolution. Bush argued
that Clinton's repeated failures reflected badly both on America's
standing in the Middle East and the world and on the office of the
presidency. Unlike Clinton, who defined Arab-Israeli peace as the most
important goal of his administration and saw himself as a genuine
peacemaker, Bush has adopted other values and other goals. Consequently,
until very recently he sent to the area relatively low level officials
such as General Anthony Zinni and Assistant Secretary of State William
Burns.

Bush reluctantly reversed his position primarily due to the requirements
of his plan to eliminate the regime of Saddam Hussein in Iraq. It is
quite possible that if this plan had not existed, Bush would not have
reversed his policy on US involvement in the present crisis, and Powell
would not have traveled to the region. The number one priority in US
foreign policy today is the global war on terrorism, and the current
number one priority in this war is the plan to complete the 1991 Gulf
War by eliminating Saddam Hussein's threats to the region and the world.
Following the September 2001 terrorist attacks in the US, the Bush
administration is convinced that if Saddam acquires weapons of mass
destruction he would not hesitate to employ them against the US and its
allies in the Middle East. Hence the need for preventive action against
Iraq.

The Bush administration is attempting to mobilize support among its Arab
allies for a military attack on Saddam, or at a minimum to obtain a
commitment from them to voice only token criticism of a possible
American attack. This was the main purpose of Vice President Dick
Cheney's recent visit to the Middle East. Arab leaders told him that
they could not deal with the Saddam issue until the Palestinian-Israeli
violence was resolved. Thus, it could be said that from an American
perspective this violence is hindering the campaign against Saddam. Seen
in this context, the reversal in Bush's stance, the upgrading of US
involvement, and the sending of Powell to the region are justified
because they are all intended to remove a serious obstacle on the road
to Baghdad.

Possible US determination to achieve a ceasefire is directly related to
the larger context and the highest priorities of American policy in the
Middle East. This rationale notwithstanding, even if the
Palestinian-Israeli confrontation is miraculously resolved in the very
near future, Arab leaders, even those aligned with the US, are unlikely
to support a military action against Saddam. But until then they are
likely to use the Palestinian-Israeli confrontation as an excuse to
refrain from taking a clear stand on Saddam.

Powell's mission is extremely difficult because the key to any ceasefire
is an effective campaign by Arafat against terrorism launched from his
territories, while the US has more leverage over Israel. Every
Palestinian act of terror is further eroding support for the
Palestinians both among official Washington and public opinion. Contrary
to public statements, the Bush people consider Arafat a terrorist who
has never lived up to his commitments and who is systematically cheating
and lying to them. Bush feels that while he and his aids have strongly
advocated in public the establishment of a Palestinian state, Arafat has
been encouraging and glorifying terrorism with the help of Iraq and Iran.

Bush cannot ignore American public opinion, which overwhelmingly favors
Israel. Despite negative media coverage of Israeli military activities,
in the latest Gallup poll an overwhelming 70% to 24% of Americans say
that Palestinian violence is terrorism, while a majority of 53% to 39%
say Israeli violence is a legitimate act of war. While Americans favor
Israel over the Palestinians by a 50% to 15% margin, Republicans,
members of Bush's party, identify more with Israel over the Palestinians
by a 67% to 8% margin.

All these external and internal conditions leave only narrow margins for
Powell's diplomacy in the Middle East.

