The Palestinian people and their leadership face a unique political
situation, one often characterized by the integral relationship that
exists between external and internal expressions of our crisis. Internal
frictions, which saw an increase between the presidency and prime
ministership (tensions that ended with the resignation of Prime Minister
Mahmoud Abbas) have been inextricably connected to the ongoing crisis in
the implementation of the roadmap
                                                , the collapse of the
Palestinian ceasefire                                                   
and Israel's resumption of its assassination policy. The recent Israeli
decision to deport President Yasser Arafat--a decision that has no
effective implementation as Israel's ally the United States has not
approved it--is now being perceived by Palestinians as one more step in
the ongoing Israeli strategy of trying to effect change in Palestinian
negotiating policies and positions by altering the composition of their
leadership.

At this crucial time, it is important to try to put these dramatic
developments in some strategic context. This Israeli right-wing
government is composed of political figures and groups that formed the
center of opposition to Palestinian-Israeli peace agreements from their
signing through their implementation. These elements have found the
current difficulties a golden opportunity to reverse the developments
that resulted from the peace process they oppose. They also come from an
ideological background that states that Israel should continue its
control over the occupied Palestinian territories and therefore prevent
the development of any Palestinian entity that might look like or have
the faculties of statehood and independence.

For this reason, the current Israeli government has slowly and
systematically worked to regain Israeli control over and occupation of
the Palestinian territories, and has achieved this on all of the West
Bank and much of Gaza. Israel is now in effective control of 90 percent
of the occupied territories. A crucial element of this plan is to
paralyze the Palestinian Authority and transform it in practice from
being an agent of political expression (as the Authority perceives
itself and the Oslo accords allowed for), into a bureaucratic facade for
the Israeli occupation.

One might even venture deeper down this avenue to recall the historic
strategic debate in Israel vis-a-vis the conflict. Israel's current
leaders always argued for the merits of a "functional compromise" to
solve the Palestinian issue in the short term while maintaining the
strategic vision of Greater Israel, instead of the mainstream leftist
strategy of "territorial compromise," which negates Israel's territorial
expansion.

The Israeli government is creating through its practices a defacto
situation where Israel is in control of all the 1967 occupied
territories, while allowing the Palestinian Authority certain functions
and responsibilities in populated areas. It is possible that one motive
behind the efforts to change the leadership in Palestine, including
threats to deport or assassinate President Arafat, is part and parcel of
this Israeli leadership's desire for a solution that will allow the
status quo to become more permanent in a functional division that is
acceptable to the Palestinian leadership.

This seems a good time to remind Israel of the many strategic mistakes
it has made during the decades that it has occupied the Palestinian
people and their land. In the mid-seventies, for example, Israel in
effect raised the profile of the Palestine Liberation Organization when
it encouraged municipal elections in an attempt to challenge the PLO,
only to have the election winners immediately declared their loyalty to
the official Palestinian leadership. Subsequently, Israel tried to
deport those mayors, and right-wing Jewish terrorists attempted to
assassinate them, but neither act succeeded in stamping out the PLO's
political representation in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.

The attempt to deport or otherwise "remove" President Arafat, the latest
unabashed Israeli interference in the composition of the Palestinian
leadership, is set to become Israel's next strategic mistake. The
political position held by Arafat is the political position held by all
Palestinian politicians and groups of significance today. In a sense,
all components of the Palestinian political leadership are Arafat.

Further, instead of contributing to the functional division that so
attracts the Israeli government, an attack on Arafat may very well take
us back in time to a scenario where there is no Palestinian Authority
and Israel is a full-fledged occupier with all the resulting security,
political, moral and international relations consequences. By now, there
is a lot of debate in Palestinian society as to whether there is a need
for the Palestinian Authority to go on if that Authority has no hope of
developing into a state. Palestinians might very well be thinking that
we are approaching the moment where Israel should no longer be allowed
to occupy our country without bearing all the responsibilities of that
occupation, especially when Israel itself keeps diminishing and
threatening the offices of the Palestinian Authority.

