Q: Is there room for a viable Palestinian state alongside a
viable Jewish state in the Land of Israel?

A: The word "viable" has been introduced into the political
parlance of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process in recent years even
though it has largely remained an undefined term. The Israeli government
has stated that it is prepared to live alongside a Palestinian state.
But at the same time it will have its own territorial and functional
interests that must be protected in order to provide for Israel's
security. Ideally, the borders and the powers of a Palestinian state
should be a product of negotiation. But at present Israel does not have
a negotiating partner to help define these elements.

Q: So if Israel withdraws unilaterally, can the remaining
territory be defined as a Palestinian state?

A: Israel will approach the final boundaries that it regards as
acceptable from the standpoint of its interest in retaining defensible
borders, which has been a long-term interest of every Israeli prime
minister since 1967. In his last address to the Knesset, one month
before his assassination, the late Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin outlined
his concept of defensible borders for Israel. There were elements that
had nothing to do with security but with Israel's national history,
e.g., his insistence that Jerusalem remain united under Israeli
sovereignty. But he also spoke of the need to retain settlement blocs
and the Jordan Rift Valley "in the widest sense of the term." This was
Rabin's legacy to the people of Israel.

Q: Do the disengagement plans of the current Israeli
government allow for a viable Palestinian state?

A: In the future, Israel should approach its options on the
territorial aspects of a settlement in the West Bank and Gaza with two
factors in mind. One, what are the lessons of the Oslo failure and how
can Israel avoid repeating them? And two, what is the likely security
environment that Israel will face in the Middle East in the foreseeable
future?

Q: You appear to insist on defining the viability of a
Palestinian state in terms of Israel's needs. What about Palestinian needs?

A: The term "viable" is like the term "the legitimate rights of the
Palestinians." As [United States President] Jimmy Carter once asked
[Israeli Prime Minister] Menachem Begin, "are there illegitimate
rights?" Accordingly, would Israel support a nonviable Palestinian
state? "Viable" is a term that is difficult to debate. Clearly different
parties attach different meanings to the term. Does it mean territorial
contiguity? Imply a certain number of square kilometers? If so, is
Singapore viable?

Israel will recognize a Palestinian state as long as Israel's interests
are protected. In the 1980s many concluded from this discussion that
federal and con-federal structures would be preferable. But that's
voluntary, and there's no indication that Jordan has such an interest.

Q: You are a former Israeli ambassador to the United
Nations. Does the United Nations define membership criteria in terms of
viability?

A: There are in international law criteria that serve as
guidelines for states to decide upon recognizing newly emerging
countries. For example, that there is a defined territory, a permanent
population, the capacity to enter into relations with other states. But
territorial critical mass or contiguity are not criteria.

