The most recent United States intervention in the Middle East and the
visit of Secretary of State Colin Powell faces serious obstacles, partly
due to reasons right here and partly due to internal American politics.
The overriding concern, however, is that the intervention simply came to
late.

The fact that this visit came after Israel had already made the sweeping
move of reoccupying all of the West Bank Palestinian territories has
complicated the task of Colin Powell. Palestinian President Yasser
Arafat had no problem accepting the three-fold plan presented by Colin
Powell. The secretary of state, on the other hand, had no problem
understanding the difficulties experienced by Palestinians and their
leadership over recent weeks. Both are in agreement that the plan Powell
has to get out of this crisis remains impractical as long as the whole
of the Palestinian territories are under Israel's occupation. Therefore,
the first hurdle facing Colin Powell's diplomacy is the new fact created
by Israel and its invasion.

Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon seems to be insisting on continuing
this invasion, however, offering two "reasonable" excuses. The first is
that as long as there is no political process, there naturally will be
no end of violent confrontations because the logic of the relations
between the occupied Palestinian people and the Israeli occupiers can
only be one of peace negotiations or confrontation.

Sharon's second reasoning is that he is receiving contradicting messages
from Washington, one urging him to stop his incursion and withdrawal,
and the other encouraging him to continue. Sharon understands very well
that Colin Powell appears to represent the minority view in the
administration and that Washington will not be able to achieve consensus
over anything beyond verbal criticism or calls for withdrawal. The
Israelis and Israeli envoys in Washington, such as former prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu and the American Jewish lobby, have been able to
convince the majority in the administration and the Congress that what
Israel is doing is simply part of the war against terror. This view
misleads these people from understanding the real nature of the
conflict, which is that of a classic case of a struggle for
decolonization that will not end without an end to the Israeli occupation.

This understanding has left the Israeli-Palestinian conflict to the
whims of American internal politics and puts serious constraints on the
possible success of Colin Powell's mission. At the same time, there
could be positive side effects to these circumstances. Not only does
Sharon understand the US political reality, but Arafat, too, understands
his own difficult and sensitive position. He understands that whatever
Colin Powell stands for is probably his last chance.

Arafat has an interest in the success of this visit because, as far as
Palestinians are concerned, if Colin Powell fails, it will be disastrous
for the Palestinian cause. Therefore, Arafat will do his best to salvage
Powell's visit from the danger of failure threatened by Israel's
insistence on continuing its occupation coupled with the lack of
political prospects.

Powell has suggested a plan of three parts. One is composed of two
parallel processes--a gradual Israeli withdrawal and a gradual
Palestinian responsiveness to any Palestinian violence. The second step
is an economic package to rebuild and rehabilitate both the security and
civilian Palestinian infrastructure. The third is a political package
based on what Powell described as "the American vision of peace in the
Middle East."

The description of that package was very general and vague, but involves
elements of Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres' famous ideas of a
near-state and also includes ideas from Sharon's idea for a regional
conference--one without Arafat and consequently, without the
Palestinians, Syrians and Lebanese. In general, Arafat responded
positively to this plan, but had two strong reservations: that political
prospects should be based on specific frameworks including the Saudi
initiative and the two most recent United Nations Security Council
Resolutions 1402 and 1397, and that the current Israeli occupation not
be subject to negotiations, i.e., that the whole of Powell's package
cannot be commenced until Israeli troops have withdrawn. That means that
the main challenge in front of Powell is guaranteeing the Israeli
willingness to end this occupation.

Still, with the Americans still unable to demonstrate equal sensitivity
to Palestinian civilian casualties of the Israeli violence, nor to
comprehend that there is no cause and effect in this ongoing vicious
circle of violence (except for the Israeli occupation), the prospects of
their contributing constructively to ending this violence are dim.
Equally, as long as the Americans have no ideas based on understanding
this violence as rooted in the political context of the Israeli
occupation of the Palestinian territories and without sensitivity for
international law as a criteria of judging what is right and wrong, the
American efforts will remain hapless.

Finally, it might be useful to note that the failure of this American
initiative will not only allow the conflict to continue, but will
further aggravate the situation. The people on both sides will realize
that there is no hope to be offered from outside, and the only tool at
hand is the further use of each's capabilities of force and
violence.

