Perhaps there will always be those who doubt that former Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak, for all his critical faults, fully hoped and
intended to reach a final status agreement with Palestinian leader Yasir
Arafat at Camp David, and that he took tremendous risks in pursuing that
goal. The modest task that Barak assigned me at that time left little
doubt in my mind exactly how serious he was.

During the weeks leading up to Camp David, Barak's government was coming
apart at the seams. Its detractors from within, led by cabinet minister
Natan Sharansky, were energetically explaining to the American Jewish
community and the media that the peace plan Barak would bring to Camp
David constituted a betrayal of Israel's most fundamental interests.
Barak himself, who did not know the American dynamic well, had been
neglecting the US scene. He seemed to believe that he could ignore
Congress and the media as long as he coordinated closely with President
Bill Clinton. Moreover, for domestic political reasons he had entrusted
the Israel Foreign Ministry to David Levi, who disapproved of Barak's
peace plans and to a large extent prevented Israeli diplomats in the US
from speaking out in favor of the prime minister's intentions. By late
June 2000 full page ads were being published by Jewish organizations in
American papers warning against the prospective peace "sell out."

At the eleventh hour, the prime minister recognized that he had a
problem: if an agreement were achieved at Camp David, Barak and
President Clinton would have a hard time selling Congress and the
American public on the need to allocate the billions of dollars that
would be required for refugee rehabilitation, water desalination, and
Israel's emerging security needs. I was given the title Senior Advisor
to the Prime Minister, and asked to help persuade the US media and
senior Jewish leaders that Barak deserved their support. During part of
my two week mission I was accompanied by Yoram Ben-Zeev, the Foreign
Ministry's very capable Deputy Director for North American Affairs.

In the course of traveling cross country and meeting with the Jewish
leadership and key editorial writers, and armed with a persuasive
background analysis and presentation of Barak's intentions, I discovered
that my task was indeed feasible. Americans, especially American Jews,
wanted peace for Israel, and understood that it could only be achieved
at the cost of painful concessions. In more than one key city I helped
write the next day's editorial in the main newspaper, welcoming Israelis
and Palestinians to Camp David and wishing them success.

Two specific incidents, I believe, best illustrate the premise--which is
equally valid today--that a determined Israeli prime minister with a
realistic peace program can get the US to back him actively.

One took place in a major West Coast city. I had finished addressing the
leadership of a very large Jewish community, asking for their support.
Many of these Jewish leaders tended as a matter of course to be more
hawkish on Israel's behalf than Israelis were. (I have compared notes
with leaders of other diasporas, such as the Armenians, and find this
rule of thumb to be true in general.) In this case, in particular,
several of the leaders were Orthodox Jews who believed strongly in the
Greater Land of Israel and were closely affiliated with the settlers of
the West Bank and Gaza, some of whose settlements would be evacuated if
Barak succeeded at Camp David and a Palestinian state were established.
After a few moments of silence one of them turned to the group and, his
voice breaking, said: "We knew this time would come. I think we have no
alternative but to get behind the prime minister of Israel." There was
no further debate.

A second incident occurred in a meeting with Richard Perle, at the time
a close adviser of George W. Bush, then Republican candidate for
president. It was important to brief Perle, who is well known for his
conservative views, in order to ensure that the Republican opposition
line up behind President Clinton and provide bipartisan support in the
event Camp David succeeded. But the briefing boomeranged: Perle refused
to listen to my outline of Barak's positions, and pronounced that no
peace agreement would be acceptable if Barak gave Arafat a foothold in
Jerusalem. In that case, Perle added, he would personally advise Bush to
condemn the agreement.

This exchange, duly reported back to Jerusalem, was quickly leaked to
the media, presumably by someone who sought to torpedo Camp David before
it had begun. But the leak, too, boomeranged: Bush's entourage, briefed
by Ben-Zeev and wary of appearing to undermine a serving president's
peace efforts, reacted by distancing itself from Perle's intervention
and giving its blessings to Camp David.

Of course, many lessons can be derived from the brief unpleasantness
with Perle. He was apparently right about Arafat, but not about the
inevitability of sharing Jerusalem if we are ever to have peace. Bush
and his advisers, who have been critical of Clinton's deep involvement
in a failed peace process ever since taking office, nevertheless
understood at the time that peace in the Middle East should be beyond
politics in America, and that the US could not permit itself to turn its
back on an Israeli leader who was determined to make peace.

