It might be easy to be deceived by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's
comments alluding to a unilateral withdrawal from Palestinian territory
and even some settlements, if the wall Israel is building around us
Palestinians were not growing longer and more oppressive by the day.
Maps show the barrier's predicted path slicing into the West Bank,
taking half of the land inside of the green line--half of the land that
Palestinians and the world agreed would make up the Palestinian state.

But Sharon's hints that he is ready to dismantle some settlements are
not an anomaly in his position, rather they are the natural conclusion
of the promise Sharon made decades ago to render Palestinian statehood
inoperable by dividing Palestinian land into cantons and surrounding
them by Israeli military control. Sharon was never happy about building
this "separation wall"--for him, it was an unnecessary division of land
that God promised the Jews. But Sharon and his allies also recognized
that building the wall was simply another way to proceed with his
plan--to push Palestinians into as little space as possible, making
their freedom and independence unattainable and leaving the rest of the
land for Israel.

When Sharon speaks now of unilateral withdrawal, he is eyeing the map of
the West Bank and the less than 20 illegal Israeli settlements (of some
150) that will eventually fall inside its walled Palestinian cantons.
Dismantling these is his "difficult concession" to the idea that the
land of historic Palestine is not the birthright of the Jews. It is by
no means an admission that this land is occupied territory, or that
Palestinians have any rights here at all. And, once his allies further
to the right have their say, the chances are that those withdrawals will
never take place. Sharon is under fire from Israel's left, and as usual
he is trying to dodge the bullet.

The international community cannot let the Israeli wall--the apartheid
wall--go unanswered. First, the humanitarian crisis that it is
introducing on an already exhausted population is of immense
proportions. When one takes the land of a farmer and leaves him only a
plot for his home, not only his family suffers. Palestinians will be
forced to buy their produce from Israeli farms built on Palestinian land
and tilled (maybe) by the Palestinians who once owned that land. It is
one more chapter in the same Palestinian story, one more land grab in
defiance of all international legality and norms.

That brings us to the second reason for blocking the wall's
construction: the United Nations' own resolutions. The United Nations
Security Council has repeatedly voted that the way out of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict lies in the two state solution based on
Resolution 242                    and the green line. This is the
international consensus and international law. Why then is Israel
allowed to act with impunity and draw new borders when and where it
chooses? If this were truly about Israel's security, the wall could
easily follow those borders sanctioned by international law.

If the wall is completed as planned, the two-state solution will be
rendered a thing of the past. Three million Palestinians will be inside
these barriers, detached from each other and their land, with no
economic agreements to maintain financial viability and unable to move
without Israeli permission. The next negotiations will agonize
fruitlessly about areas where the wall might be moved or removed,
distancing us further from the crux of the problem: the illegal Israeli
occupation. Tensions will escalate with the desperation of a people
canned in tight borders and stewing in poverty and hopelessness. The
Gaza Strip already has a wall, and it is a prime example of what lies in
store for the West Bank.

Ariel Sharon began the implementation of his plan to decimate
Palestinian nationhood by sending the Israeli army to annul the borders
that had been drawn by the Oslo process. Palestinians responded by
rethinking their commitment to the two-state solution. "If Israel
doesn't recognize us," they said, "why should we recognize Israel?"
Thus, in a marked change from before the uprising, nearly half of
Palestinians now say that the aim of the intifada is to liberate all of
historic Palestine. The building of the apartheid wall will only further
prove to Palestinians that Israel has no intention of offering them
independence and freedom on any part of this land.

The two-state solution is the only compromise on the table, and it is in
dire jeopardy. It is up to the international community--the Quartet
guided by the United States--to save this region from Sharon's grand
plan.

