On the face of it, the Palestinian state that most of us envisage
already has three strikes against it when it comes to assessing its
viability. First, the history of states that are split into two
separate, non-contiguous geographical entities--in the Palestinian case,
Gaza and the West Bank--is not very promising. Witness the fate of
Pakistan/Bangladesh several decades ago. Secondly, "Palestine" never
functioned as a coherent Arab political entity until the advent of the
Palestinian Authority in 1994, and that experience has proven a failure.
And third, Palestine's disastrous economic and demographic situation can
hardly be described as self-sustaining. Nor do all of Palestine's
neighbors necessarily fully legitimize its claim to statehood; here I am
referring not to Israel, where some 80 percent do recognize that
claim--but to Syria.

There is an element of arrogance in discussing the future of Palestine
in these and similar terms of "viability". After all, which states among
us are viable, and which have proven accurate or credible in evaluating
the viability of others? In the 1930s and 40s, British experts asserted
that the Jewish yishuv in Palestine/Eretz Israel could never absorb
100,000 Jewish refugees and survive, yet Israel successfully doubled its
original population of around 600,000 in its first few years of
existence. Even today Israel is still over-dependent on foreign aid to
qualify under some criteria of viability.

On the other hand, certain Israelis have been arguing for 50 years that
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan--currently a pillar of regional
stability and economic progress--is an artificial, non-viable state that
will soon collapse. And of course the present plight of Iraq, with its
three distinct religious/ethnic sectors and additional minorities,
provides ample grist for the mill of the viability-sayers.

Indeed, it would be a relatively easy exercise to delineate a set of
criteria for state viability that eliminate most of the countries in the
Middle East.

It is tempting for many Israelis to discuss Palestinian state viability
in terms of Israel's security and other needs. In other words, if
Israelis can feel that Israel itself is viable--meaning, in this case,
safe--alongside a Palestinian state, then that state too is viable,
whatever it looks like. But this approach ignores the dangers to Israel
of the emergence, almost by default--that is, by dint of a partial
Israeli unilateral withdrawal that is accompanied by de facto annexation
of large parts of the West Bank--of a Palestinian "state" that is so
constrained and fragmented by Israel's perceived territorial needs that
it proves ungovernable, hence unstable and dangerous to its neighbors.
Back in the 1970s and 80s we saw how disastrous for our own interests
was our proximity to the then anarchic state of Lebanon. We should be
wary about repeating the experience.

In view of today's demographic situation, we clearly do require the
emergence of a territorially viable and stable Palestinian state, if
only to enable Israel to survive as a Jewish and a democratic state.
This recognition in turn bespeaks an interesting and relatively new
Israeli condition for Palestinian viability. Not only must a Palestinian
state serve as the homeland of the Palestinian people, enjoy maximum
contiguity, cultivate political unity and a stable, non-violent
leadership and enjoy at least the potential for relative economic self
sufficiency in order to be viable. It must also, by virtue of its very
existence, be so configured as to enable Israel to remain a Jewish and a
democratic state, and Jordan to remain the Hashemite Kingdom. That is to
say, it must absorb all the Palestinian political energies in the
region. And it must be constitutionally pledged to abjure any advocacy
of irredentism, incitement, refugee "return" and denial of historic
symbols of nationhood concerning its neighbors.

True, this criterion too, which is almost certainly shared by both
Jordan and Israel, reflects a certain arrogance. But in international
terms--within the framework of what Palestinians are fond of terming, in
their own arrogance, "international legitimacy"--it is also fair. The
Palestinian leadership should integrate it into its own concept of the
parameters for eventually negotiating Palestinian statehood.

