It seems that the attempt to achieve a ceasefire between Israel and the
Palestinians as part of the implementation of phase I of the roadmap
                     has collapsed, with a return to the usual vicious
circle of violent actions and counteractions.

The publics of the two sides accepted the short period of relative
tranquility with eagerness and a strong wish not to regress to the
former condition of violent conflict, and yet, when it collapsed, nobody
seemed to be surprised. This deserves an explanation. If the vast
majority of the two peoples wants a resumption of the peace process,
supports implementation of the roadmap and longs for an end to the
bloodshed, why are the two sides regressing to mutual violence so easily
and so quickly, and nobody is really surprised? What is the explanation
for this wide gap between public opinion and the leadership decisions of
the two parties?

One possible explanation is the discrepancy between the yearning in each
camp for tranquility and the belief that it is indeed possible. Each
party believes that its side wants a peaceful solution but that it
cannot trust the other side. Because of this mutual mistrust, neither
party accepted the roadmap in good faith and neither believed it would
really be implemented. The only purpose of accepting it was to transfer
the ball to the other's court, and create a perception among the third
parties and especially the United States that the failure was the fault
of the other party.

Another explanation is the inability of the two leaderships to change
well-rooted patterns of behavior. The Palestinian leadership continually
makes empty promises that it will deal with terrorism. Then it does
nothing, while hoping that somehow things will fall into place and
everything will be fine. When everything is not fine, they rush to utter
excuses and tell the external world the fairy tale that if they do
anything against the armed groups it will lead to a civil war. They
continually talk in two tongues, one aimed at their people and the other
aimed at the outer world, because they do not have the courage to tell
the truth to their people. They cannot stop bickering and fighting for
personal positions instead of uniting around a common positive policy
that will bring them closer to the realization of their national goals.

Israeli leaders also lack the courage to tell their people the truth;
therefore they prefer to hide behind outbursts of emotional response.
The best example is the Israeli cabinet decision to work for the
expulsion of Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat. Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon knows that it is not feasible due to international outrage.
Moreover he knows that it will not help to ameliorate the situation. But
it is very convenient for him to accept such a decision that will
satisfy the right-wing elements in his government and some angry
elements in the Israeli public, instead of telling the Israeli people
the sad truth that his policy has reached a dead end.

The Israeli government and security establishment cannot overcome their
urge to react with violence to any violent provocation by the
Palestinians, not understanding that the pacification of the Palestinian
population is a process that will take time, and that Israel's almost
automatic response does not give this process the slimmest chance of
succeeding. Nor is the Israeli leadership capable of ceasing to
personalize the problem, believing that if it gets rid of this
Palestinian person or has another Palestinian figure as its interlocutor
this will solve the problem.

Is this a hopeless situation? Can anything be done? Technically
speaking, the nomination of Ahmad Qurei (Abu Alaa) as Palestinian prime
minister provides an opportunity to resume the hudna
                                                   (ceasefire) and put
the train back on the track of implementation of the roadmap. One could
also argue that Abu Alaa has a better chance of success then former
Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), because he enjoys better
support among the Palestinian leadership and has adopted a more
intelligent modus operandi of trying to manipulate Arafat to accept his
policy instead of entering a direct public confrontation with the
Palestinian leader. It is also possible that it will be easier for
Sharon and Abu Alaa to reach an understanding regarding phase II of the
roadmap, which establishes a Palestinian state with provisional borders,
because Abu Alaa already developed the concept of such a state together
with Shimon Peres and with the backing of Sharon, when Peres was in
Sharon's government, while Abu Mazen basically objected to the concept
of additional interim arrangements.

The real problem is that the fundamental mutual distrust and the
inability of the two leaderships to get out of their familiar patterns
of behavior will mount the same obstacles against any attempt to build
something positive with Abu Alaa's government. Assuming this is the
case, it is time to return to developing ideas that seek to combine
unilateral steps by the two sides with more intensive international
involvement, as a way of maintaining a more stable and quiet situation
that could later enable the rebuilding of mutual trust and political
progress towards reconciliation.

