In observing reactions to the coming Israeli elections, it seems clear
that, save the "Oslo elite" (that exclusive upper middle class created
in a time of moderation and relative wealth), the average Palestinian is
indifferent to these elections. While there are certainly those who
express the desire for Labor to win, regardless of what Labor has to
offer, most Palestinians remain cold to the elections as a vehicle of
any sort of optimism or change.

There are three things that seem to be behind that indifference. First
of all, most Palestinians are observing the trend in the Israeli
establishment towards the right wing as also a trend towards maintaining
the occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Simultaneously, the
Labor Party does not seem to understand that Ariel Sharon and his ilk
are proposing total war and that Labor's only chance to win over this is
to propose a complete contrast of "total peace."

Granted, there are signs of a slight shake-up going in inside the Labor
party. But for the most part, the Labor candidate Amram Mitzna
articulates his program as "Gaza without settlements." It is not
surprising that this message has not captured the imagination of
Palestinians (nor many Israelis, for that matter). Mitzna has only gone
halfway to the understanding that beating Sharon means declaring total
peace.

As such, Mitzna seems to be abetting the general Israeli amnesia, rather
than reversing it. Speaking in Nazareth this week, Tel Aviv professor
Adi Ophir refers to what he calls "sitationism", where Israelis evoke
what is happening be saying that the "situation is very bad." This
reflects the "short-term Israeli memory" concerning the occupation.
Israelis prefer not to talk about it, referring instead to the last
bomb. They are living, therefore, in a conflict that has no history.

In another example, last October when Peace Now drew crowds of tens of
thousands to Tel Aviv for a peace march, the rallying slogan was "Leave
the territories, and be ourselves again." The Palestinians as occupied
people have no place in this formulation. In a way then, the very heart
of the Israeli discourse has returned to original Zionist ideology: a
turning inward of Jews on the land in Israel. As such, Palestinians seem
to sense that we have passed from a period of colonial establishment to
a period of colonial society (reflected in at least the majority of
Israeli society).

Finally, at the start of the Oslo interim period, Palestinians really
believed that the small dividends would expand and result in more
compromise. The failure of this optimism has made Palestinians lose hope
in the ability of Israeli internal dynamics to act and push for a real
solution. Now Palestinians feel that the only hope is for external
factors to influence Israel. Take the case of Algeria. For the French
people, Algeria was a problem far away; it had little to do with their
lives. It was American pressure on De Gaulle, not the clamoring of the
French public, that finally turned the tide for the banishment of the
French colonial system.

The Palestinians are suffering under a very real and normal occupation
and their resistance is a real and normal push for decolonization. The
specificity of this conflict is the total hypocrisy that exists on the
part of the international community. We know that this comes from guilt
and the history of the Holocaust, but its result has been that the
international community simply keeps dumping money into Palestinian
society, supporting its elites and keeping the society at large
resuscitated just enough to prolong the occupation, but not enough to
allow it to really come alive and throw off the colonial
master.

