Israel's experience of negotiating with both Syria and the PLO began
some 13 years ago in Madrid. Since then, the key tactical questions have
been whether to negotiate with these two actors simultaneously or
sequentially and, if sequentially, with whom to begin.

Previous experience is so diverse as to be of little help. In 1948-49
Israel negotiated armistice agreements with all its state neighbors (not
the Palestinians) in quick succession. In 1977-79 it negotiated solely
with Egypt, which even took upon itself to represent the Palestinian
cause in framing the Camp David agreements. In 1994 PM Yitzhak Rabin
negotiated secretly with Jordan during the Oslo I discussions with the
PLO, but for historic, geographic and demographic reasons the
circumstances of the Jordan-PLO-Israel triangle were very different from
those involving Syria.

Since Madrid, various Israeli leaders have treated the issue
differently. Former Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir negotiated
under duress with both Syria and the Palestinians simultaneously, but he
apparently sought to ensure that neither track would succeed. Prime
Ministers Rabin, Peres and Barak at various times gave priority to the
Syrian track. They reasoned that an early agreement with Syria, and by
extension with Lebanon, would round out the circle of peace around
Israel and deprive the Islamist and secular Palestinian radical
terrorist organizations of support, thereby leaving the PLO in a weaker
negotiating position. Indeed, to some extent it was also assumed that
the very fact of highly publicized parallel negotiations with Syria and
the PLO would render both more flexible.

Prime Minister Netanyahu also gave priority to the Syrian track. But he
kept his talks with the Syrians a secret, while his negotiations with
the Palestinians were in any case confined to limited goals, i.e.,
withdrawal from Hebron and the Wye River agreement. Some Israeli
leaders, like Rabin, opined that the Israeli public was in any case not
capable of "absorbing" two simultaneous agreements with Arab neighbors
that involved territorial concessions. Virtually all appeared to believe
that a deal with Syria would have broader geo-strategic benefits for
Israel, would be far less complicated to negotiate and, in terms of
territorial concessions and immediate benefits, would be easier for the
Israeli public to accept.

Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is basically not interested in negotiating
with either Syria or the PLO if this means making significant Israeli
territorial concessions or offering confidence building measures. Thanks
to Sharon and Palestinian Authority leader Yasser Arafat, there is no
peace process with the PLO. The PLO/Palestinian Authority is so weak,
and anarchy so rampant, that Israel may not have a viable Palestinian
partner anyway. Hence talks with Syria can hardly be conceptualized as a
tactic for exercising political leverage vis-a-vis the Palestinians.

The key to understanding this situation and its costs and benefits for
Israel lies in post-9/11 American policies in the region. Thanks to the
US war on terrorism and occupation of Iraq, Israel's regional strategic
situation has never been so good: there is no threat of conventional
war, and a powerful American ally is targeting the weapons of mass
destruction and Islamic terrorism that threaten Israel. Radical
countries like Syria, Libya and Iran are in various ways beginning to
seek to accommodate Washington. There is little if any American pressure
on Israel to make concessions or even to negotiate with Syria or the
PLO. Indeed, the current situation, in which Syrian President Bashar
Asad is offering to renew negotiations without pre-conditions and
Washington does not take the initiative to mediate between Damascus and
Jerusalem, is without precedent.

If only the neo-conservatives in Washington knew where to draw the line
in Israel's case! By allowing and even encouraging Sharon not to talk to
Asad, they are sending a message to the Arab world that neither they nor
Israel are interested in peace. Sending ambiguous and half-hearted
protests to Jerusalem regarding the fence, the outposts, and Sharon's
plan to reduce settlements in Gaza and thicken them in the West Bank,
the Americans are enabling and encouraging him to create an apartheid
reality that is the very antithesis of the democratization that they
preach for the region.

Suppose, for the sake of argument, that Sharon accepted Asad's
initiative and agreed to negotiate. The results could hardly be
negative. If indeed Syria is weak, confused and in need of improved
relations with the US, then Israel might get a better territorial deal
than anything offered to it in the past. If not, it at least displayed a
readiness to talk peace with a neighbor. As for the Palestinian sphere,
Israel could demand that the first item on its agenda with Syria be
Hizballah's activities, not only in southern Lebanon but in fomenting
terrorism in the West Bank and Gaza. To the extent that an
Israeli-Syrian agreement looks possible, this might encourage Yasser
Arafat to take security steps that would stabilize Israeli-Palestinian
relations and set the stage for renewed negotiations.

Even if Israeli-Syrian talks are once again doomed to failure, we have
little to lose by trying.

