With about six weeks to go before Israel's elections, a number of
election-related developments are emerging that are very relevant for
Israeli-Palestinian relations.

First, the Israeli public by and large does not seek a return to
negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization in the near
term. As long as the violence continues and Palestinian leader Yasir
Arafat, now thoroughly discredited, remains in power, negotiations
appear to the public to be counterproductive. The backing of United
States President George W. Bush for this position is significant in
persuading Israelis. This is a major achievement for Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon, and explains a good part of the public's electoral support
for him.

It also explains the public's indifference to the efforts of a few
select Israelis and Palestinians--Beilin-Abd Rabo, Ayalon-Nusseibeh--to
influence the elections by publicizing their success in reaching
agreement informally on some or all of the issues. While former
negotiator Yossi Beilin was in effect voted out of the Labor Party
mainly because of his sharp opposition to the leadership of Fuad Ben
Eliezer, he also paid a high price for his insistence that the Oslo
formula can still be made to work and that dedicated Israeli and
Palestinian negotiators can pick up where the parties left off at Taba
in January 2001.

Amram Mitzna, the new leader of Labor, has not fully internalized this
development in public opinion. He presents one position--unilateral
withdrawal from Gaza within a year--that is popular with the public,
then partially neutralizes that gain by pledging first to return to
unconditional negotiations with Arafat. Mitzna would be well advised to
stick with his advocacy of unilateral dismantling of settlements, which
appeals to many voters' sense of strategic and economic national
priorities, and drop his proposal to renew negotiations, which under
current conditions is a non-starter with the public.

A second, very ugly truth emerging from these elections is that the
Palestinian system is not the only one that harbors corruption. If the
allegations of mafia-style vote buying and manipulating in the Likud
primaries continue to develop, the Likud could lose a lot of votes.
While no comparison between Israel's democracy and the Palestinian
Authority is intended, and Israel's system of legal and electoral
safeguards is likely to weed out corrupt candidates and possibly racist
candidates and hate-mongers prior to the January 28 election date, it is
nevertheless hard to ignore the irony: one of the foundations of
Sharon's anti-Arafat election platform is his objection to the
corruption that is rife within the PA.

A third development concerns the role of Palestinian violence in
affecting voter choice in Israel. Here the situation remains somewhat
ambiguous. For one, it is not at all clear that efforts spearheaded by
Palestinian moderates to arrange a genuine ceasefire will or can succeed
in persuading Palestinian militants. Then too, even if they do succeed,
the overall effect is uncertain.

The conventional wisdom holds that ongoing Palestinian violence helps
the cause of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon--hence the current Palestinian
effort to declare a ceasefire in order to assist the Israeli peace camp.
If violence really does end or subside significantly in the coming
weeks, this same conventional wisdom holds that this will be good for
Mitzna, who will point to encouraging signs of peace. But on the other
hand, won't Sharon point to a unilateral ceasefire as a sign that his
hard line policies have succeeded? He could declare "victory" and offer
to renew negotiations himself (as soon as Arafat is shunted aside).

Finally, barring unforeseen circumstances it appears that neither the
ongoing primaries corruption scandal, nor a Palestinian ceasefire, nor a
decision by Mitzna to abandon his call for unconditional renewed
negotiations will be sufficient to eliminate Likud's current large lead
in the polls and bring about Sharon's downfall and an out-and-out
left/Labor victory. Hence we must ask: what would constitute a realistic
electoral achievement for the Israeli left and center that favor ending
the settlement folly and facilitating the emergence of a Palestinian
state along borders close to the 1967 lines?

The achievement would lie in remaining outside the next Sharon
government, and galvanizing the opposition to oppose Sharon's policies
and alert both the Israeli public and the international community to the
damage they are doing to Israel's future as a Jewish, democratic state.
Mitzna is clearly inclined in this direction. But the Labor primaries
produced a future Knesset contingent that appears to prefer the
artificial warmth and comfort of a junior partnership in Sharon's next
unity government.

Hence not only are the elections themselves a test of Mitzna's
leadership; the post-electoral, coalition-negotiating period will also
test his capacity to withstand internal party pressures and continue to
champion unilateral redeployment.

