Among the most contradictory features of the Israeli-Palestinian
confrontation are the preferences and positions of Israeli public
opinion. Surveys consistently show that a majority of the public is
prepared to broadly accept the Clinton parameters for a settlement,
involving the creation of a Palestinian state, the dismantling of
settlements, and some sort of division of Jerusalem. In the absence of a
negotiated settlement, an even greater percentage of the Jewish sector
favors the concept of unilateral separation, the establishment of a
security border, and the consolidation of settlements into a few main
blocs.

The Labor Party, led by Amram Mitzna, subscribes wholeheartedly to both
of these ideas, while Prime Minister Ariel Sharon favors, at best, a
much more limited, long-range interim solution, and this only after the
Palestinians eschew violence and undertake fundamental reforms. Yet
Mitzna's chances of unseating Ariel Sharon and a Likud-led coalition
government appear small, as the public steadfastly rejects blaming
Sharon for the unprecedented level of Israeli civilian casualties and
economic deterioration during the last two years. Indeed, Sharon's level
of toughness in conducting the conflict meets with broad approval by a
public which holds the Palestinian side, and Yasser Arafat in
particular, responsible for the war. At the same time, a majority of the
Israeli public continues to favor the unity government formula, and it
appears likely that it will continue to do so, namely a Likud-led
government in which the Labor Party will be a junior, but significant
partner.

In the short run, this reality holds out little hope for those
Palestinians who favor a return to the negotiating table on the basis of
the Clinton plan. Liberal and pragmatic Palestinians had drawn
encouragement from Mitzna's election in the Labor primary, for it
indicated that a significant sector of the Israeli public was seeking a
way out of the abyss into which both communities were sliding. It
reinforced their own tendency to reevaluate Palestinian strategy and, in
particular, to bring about a cessation of suicide bombings and return to
the less violent, "popular/mass" tactics of the first intifada.

Indeed, there can be little doubt that large-scale terror attacks will
reinforce the Israeli public's support for Sharon's hard-line.
Conversely, a whole-hearted public endorsement of Mitzna by the
Palestinian leadership, let alone active campaigning among Palestinian
Israelis, will drive Jewish voters further to the right.

But even if the Palestinians "behave" during the next six weeks, the
chances of defeating Sharon appear small. Israelis' faith in Palestinian
good will and intentions has been shattered (and vice versa), meaning
that no rapid shifts back towards more conciliatory postures can be
expected.

However, it will be a mistake for Palestinians to interpret Sharon's
re-election as closing the last option for ameliorating the situation.
Despite their standing as the weaker party, what they do does matter,
and will continue to help shape the contours of the conflict, including
the nature and policies of the next Israeli coalition government.

Just as Palestinians pay close attention to the internal Israeli
dialogue, so too are Israeli ears attuned to Palestinian discourse, from
Sari Nusseibeh to Hamas. This discourse, as Israelis understand it, does
not herald a fundamental softening of the Palestinian position, either
tactically or strategically. Nusseibeh, it is understood, is clearly way
ahead of the Palestinian curve when it comes to Israel's red line, the
right of Palestinian refugees to return to their homes and lands in
pre-1967 Israel.

There is a widespread belief within Fatah that violence makes a mockery
of Sharon's efforts and that a cessation of violence will be an
unwarranted concession to Israel (which mirrors Israeli reluctance to
"reward terror" by dismantling settlements and withdrawing from Gaza).
The preference within Hamas and Islamic Jihad for a narrow, right-wing
Israeli government, and the Palestinian Authority's determination to
avoid excessive Palestinian civil strife, suggests that Palestinian
violence, and the forceful Israeli response that it brings, will
continue to shape the dynamics of the conflict.

What about Arafat? However critical Palestinians may be of Arafat in
private, and however much some have come to recognize him as part of the
problem, they remain unwilling and/or unable to reduce his centrality,
both as a symbol of their struggle and as the leader of their
now-tattered institutions. Israelis, for their part, almost unanimously
believe that Arafat missed the historic opportunity for an honorable
peace agreement, and is not to be trusted. Hence, Mitzna's declaration
of his willingness to resume negotiations forthwith with the PA to test
its intentions was greeted with derision in Israel, and damaged him
politically. On the other hand, the combination of Mitzna's refreshing
straight talk and the centrist nature of the Labor list of Knesset
candidates may strengthen him among middle-of-the road Israeli voters.

A formal and final end to the 100-year old conflict, let alone a
historic reconciliation between the two peoples, is clearly out of
reach. Nonetheless, after two years of violent confrontation, mutual
brutalization and dehumanization, Israelis and Palestinians both appear
to be approaching another crossroad. Clearly, there are external factors
which will heavily shape developments in the months ahead, first and
foremost the looming US war against Iraq, and its impact on all
interested parties. The Israeli elections, by themselves, are unlikely
to result in a dramatic shift in Israeli-Palestinian relations. But down
the road both communities, and particularly their political and
intellectual elites, will again face tough choices, internally and
vis-a-vis each other.

