When the two-state solution is no longer a practical possibility, we may
not have the luxury of deciding what to do: there are few remaining
choices. The unraveling of the two state solution is going to leave us
with one state, in a variety of possible forms ranging from a government
of "one person, one vote" to that of an apartheid state. Israel (and
particularly this right-wing government, which is ideologically opposed
to two equal and independent states) is trying to push for "autonomous"
arrangements whereby Palestinians will control the smallest possible
landmass, while squeezing into that area the highest number of
Palestinians possible. This "autonomy" will then be rigged to be fully
surrounded by Israeli sovereignty on the whole of Israel/Palestine, from
the sea to the river. In other words, we Palestinians and Israelis are
being offered an apartheid solution where one state will include two
ethnic groups, a majority and minority, that answer to two distinct sets
of laws, are served by two levels of infrastructure and maintain two
entirely disparate socio-economic levels.

This end result is not going to solve anything, least of all the mutual
hostility and fighting, because Palestinians will continue to demand
their rights and to correct the injustice they have been done.
Subsequently, Israel will never be settled as a stable and normal state
in the region and will maintain its negative international reputation.

At the moment, political developments are significantly advancing this
prognosis. Not only due to ongoing hostilities, but also because of the
current layout of settlements in the West Bank, Gaza Strip and
Jerusalem, a viable and contiguous Palestinian state is difficult to
conceive of. As one Palestinian professor put it recently at a Birzeit
University conference, "Five years ago, we were saying that if
settlement expansion continues at current rates, then it would
jeopardize the two state solution. Now I am saying that we are already
at the point of no return, but for those in the audience with their
doubts, just imagine things five years from now."

In other words, either the two state solution is already an
impossibility or we are fast moving in that direction. Given the minute
chance that current trends will be reversed by political developments,
we must begin planning for this eventuality. What is most frustrating is
that this situation is by no means an act of God. The expansion of
Israeli settlements is man-made, the result of deliberate policies
pursued by successive governments of Israel. And in this situation,
Palestinian extremists will be happier, riding the new realities created
by the Israeli extremists that happen to sit in the Israeli government
today.

Once the two state solution is dead, our fate will lie in one of two
directions: in a single democratic state where religion and ethnicity do
not determine the allotment of rights and resources, or in a limbo where
religion and nationality are the basis for violence and instability and
hatred for decades to come. In this scenario, both peoples are
guaranteed more than their fair share of suffering. For this reason, the
practices of the right wing Israeli government are more dangerous than
they appear at face value. Not only is this government dismissing
today?s small chance to sue for peace, but it is preempting the
possibility for peace in the future by doing away with the basic
physical outlines of two independent states.

