Q: If Israel resumes negotiations with Syria, what
consequences do you think this will have on the Palestinian-Israeli
negotiating track?

A: I believe that any progress on the Syrian track with Israel will
have a positive impact on the Palestinian track. I would see what the
Syrian government is requesting from the Israeli government. Any
developments satisfying these demands will strengthen the Palestinian
position in the negotiations with Israel.

Q: Do you think that current and past Israeli governments
have played off the Syrians vis-a-vis the Palestinians in the past?

A: Absolutely. Israel has tried from day one to negotiate on
separate tracks. They have always attempted to divide the Palestinian
track from the Syrian track from the Lebanese track and so forth in
order to avoid a comprehensive solution to the conflict. So it was
absolutely in the interests of Israel to have negotiations progressing
on separate tracks. The one who paid the biggest price was the weakest
party in the process being, the Palestinians first and foremost.
However, Israel has always been the strongest party and has therefore
dictated the peace negotiations from the very beginning.

Q: What do you believe are the reasons that Syrian
President Bashar Asad has offered to resume negotiations with Israel?

A: It's clear that after the war in Iraq and the immense changes
that have taken place over the past nine or ten months, Syria feels it
is isolated. President Bashar Asad has certainly realized that the space
in which he is allowed to maneuver has become noticeably smaller. In
that sense, he needs to do something more to respond to the American
demands or the Israeli demands.

Q: Do you think that there has been a difference between
the way the Israeli Labor Party has negotiated with Syria and the
strategies employed by the Likud, both in the past and in the present?

A: I always felt that Labor has the capacity to see the big picture
much more than the Likud does. The Likud Party seems to concentrate much
more on the tactics of now. Looking at the current Israeli government,
they are focused on the current situation. They are following quite a
short sighted policy. They are looking at how they can achieve the
maximum gains for the state of Israel today and I don't believe that the
gains they can realistically achieve today are the ones that will serve
them best in the long run. In that sense, Israeli Prime Minister
Sharon's Syria policy is surely not in the interests of the state of
Israel as such.

Q: What do you think the Palestinian leadership should do
if the Syria-Israel track is suddenly reopened?

A: I would do my absolute best to coordinate with the Syrian
government. It goes back to what I was saying earlier: the moment there
are separate negotiation tracks, is the moment that all Arab parties are
weakened. By agreeing to sign any hypothetical agreement alone, they
will become active participants in Israel's divide and conquer strategy.
When you look at the various tracks of negotiations that took place the
past ten years or so, I am totally convinced that Israel approached
these talks without the intention of completing a comprehensive peace.
The Israelis have been focused on trying to obtain the "biggest" gains
they could in the short term. Again, this is a short-sighted way of
conducting peace negotiations because any true peace must be
comprehensive. This can only be done when all parties sign off on the
agreements. The piecemeal manner of conducting these talks has only led
to disaster. There has to be a win-win situation. If one party succeeds
in forcing its entire agenda at the cost of all the other parties, it
will backfire in the end because one side will be humiliated.

Q: Do you believe that Israel's withdrawal from Lebanon in
2000 has changed the equation with Syria today?

A: It surely did. Before 2000, Israel always tried to combine a
withdrawal from Lebanon with Syrian concessions on the Golan Heights.
The moment Israel withdrew from Lebanon it separated the issue of south
Lebanon from that of the Golan, thereby strengthening Syria's position
by no longer holding south Lebanon hostage until Syria retreated from
its Golan position. Until today, Syria has insisted that it will not
accept anything less than a total Israeli withdrawal from the Golan. To
be honest, I am not sure how much Bashar Asad still holds this to be
true. Given the situation in Iraq, with an American occupying force to
its east, I don't know if the Syrian government is not maybe more
willing to make concessions on the Golan.

