I don't know which phenomenon to lose more sleep over. On the one hand,
Israel's image in Western Europe and the Islamic world has deteriorated
radically, and anti-Semitism is on the rise. On the other, Israel's
image in the United States is so solid that the Bush administration
gives Prime Minister Ariel Sharon a blank check to build fences and
settlements and destroy what may be the last opportunity to reach a two
state solution that will preserve Israel as a Jewish and a democratic
state.

No Israeli public diplomacy and information (/hasbara/) campaign can
effectively counter the effects on world opinion of occupation, targeted
killings, settlements, fences, and malnutrition among Palestinian
children. While the Muslim world is in any case predisposed against us,
even Western Europe is not particularly inclined to support us, given
its hang-ups about colonialism, its growing Muslim population and its
dependence on Arab oil. Only Israel's image in the US seems to be an
exception, due apparently to the American reaction to the Muslim radical
attacks of 9/11 (in effect, a better capacity to identify with Israel's
dilemma), the large and influential Jewish and evangelical Christian
communities for whom Israel seemingly can do no wrong, and the US
perception of "shared values" with Israel.

The growing wave of anti-Semitism in many parts of the world is, in view
of historical precedent--the Holocaust--in many ways a far more
frightening phenomenon than Israel's bad image per se. There are ugly
anti-Semitic strains in Islam and in post-World War II Europe that have
nothing at all to do with Israel and its behavior. Like the twin towers
on 9/11, the synagogues in Turkey would have been attacked even had
Israel been at peace with its neighbors.

But many of the recalcitrant anti-Semites, particularly on the fringes
of Islam and the conflict, feel empowered right now to emerge from their
intellectual and religious cocoons only because the Israeli-Palestinian
war has painted Israel in such negative colors. They are too ashamed to
show themselves when there is a dynamic peace process.

Right now the process may be dynamic, but it is leading us toward an
even more brutal war, rather than peace. By dint of a combination of
geography and demography the clock is ticking on the two state solution.
The spread of the settlements renders it increasingly difficult to
disengage into two states, while the Palestinian birthrate will soon
generate a situation whereby a Jewish minority rules over an Arab
majority. The consequent doubts cast upon the Zionist ideal of a Jewish
and democratic state have further blurred the lines between
anti-Semitism and legitimate anti-Israel opinions. Here and there a few
dare to suggest that a rationale for Israel's existence no longer exists.

Never mind that no other nation in the world is treated this way by its
detractors--suggesting that it is the root of all evil (Greek composer
Mikis Theodorakis), that it is a "race of perpetrators" (German
parliamentarian Martin Hohmann and his military admirer, Brigadier
General Reinhard Gunzel), that it controls the world and--even as Jews
in Israel and in Istanbul are being murdered by suicidal Muslim
fanatics--sends others to die for it (outgoing Malaysian leader Mahathir
Mohammed). No amount of hand wringing is going to alter the unique and
precarious status of the Jewish people in the eyes of most of the
world--something Israel's very existence was supposed to have done.

Yet we can blunt this new anti-Jewish offensive; we can discredit the
anti-Semites and force them back into their caves. This is for the most
part not a task for information officers. Rather, it is mainly the
obligation of our political leadership. We have the means and the
capability to negotiate a two state solution with the Palestinians. And
if, as I suspect, there is no serious negotiating partner on the other
side with the leadership capability to make hard decisions and enforce
them, then we have the means and the capability to disengage
unilaterally, including dismantling of the problematic settlements. We
have to do these things not because the Palestinians necessarily have
earned our good will or won the information war, or because we are
intimidated by the anti-Semites--but because this is the only way for a
democratic and Jewish Israel to survive. And that makes for good /hasbara/.

More and more Israelis, including very prominent political and security
figures, are sounding the alarm regarding Israel's future. It is
absolutely vital that diaspora Jewish leaders--many of whom are
currently gathered in Jerusalem--and American political leaders join and
encourage them, rather than sit back and pay lip service to Israel's
current leadership, right or wrong, or keep silent because the war on
terrorism ostensibly dictates a united front. The potential consequences
of the South Africanization of this conflict--for the Jewish people and
for American interests in the region--are too awful to warrant
maintaining a hands-off policy any further.

We have to win the internal information war among Israelis and their
supporters before we can alter Israel's image abroad.

