Propaganda is key in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Both parties are
very dependent on external factors, and therefore expend a great deal of
effort in trying to swing support to their side, subsequently exerting
pressure on their opponent. Adding to the stakes, the international
community views the Middle East as a region of crucial importance. This
is Europe's backyard, it is where most of the world's petrol is
produced, it is central to the world's monotheistic faiths and also
forms a bridge between the geographic east and west.

For these reasons, Israelis and Palestinians respectively have devoted a
great deal of effort to trying to convince the outside world that their
cause is deserving of support, with the fault lying with the other side.
Israel relies on external assistance, especially from the United States,
to guarantee its security through arms and financing. Israel is also
dependent on the support of the Jewish community in the diaspora,
particularly that of Jews in the United States and Europe. It is
crucial, therefore, that Israel be able to convince those parties that
it must have their backing, and with this in mind, Israel often presents
itself as a victim that needs protection, as well as the standard bearer
for American and western values.

But sometimes, reality gets in the way. When the state of Israel came
into being, a great injustice was inflicted upon another people. Now, in
order for Israel to survive under the terms it has established for
itself, Israelis must illegally occupy that same people and their land.
This occupation is maintained through all sorts of violations of human
rights and international law--just the sort of actions that Israel would
like to avoid in view of its target audience. To explain this disparity
between reality and the ideal, Israel maintains a sophisticated public
relations machine whose job is to offset the negative propaganda that
results from Israeli actions. Sometimes, this means hiding the truth,
twisting reality, or just plain lying, if necessary.

There is no doubt that Israel has the equipment to succeed at this task.
Israeli officials have very high expectations in this regard and they
invest tremendously in producing results. At the same time, Israel
benefits from an understanding of its American-western audience, because
in some ways, Israelis are part of it. The interplay between Israeli
propaganda efforts and the western audience is illustrated vividly
through the obvious differences of opinion generally found between
foreign media representatives stationed in Israel, and their editors
"back home." Because the correspondents in the field are more attached
to reality and relatively less influenced by propaganda and games of
interest, their views are often more textured, fair and less subject to
manipulation that those to be found in western capitals near the halls
of power and influence.

On the other hand, for so long, Palestinians thought that the justness
of their cause was so obvious as to need no explication. Particularly in
the first two or three decades of the conflict, Palestinians were
completely ignorant of the importance of media and public relations,
first because of a lack of expertise, and second because of a lack of
contact with the western world and a resulting naivete about what
westerners held to be true. But starting in the 80s, particularly with
the first intifada of nonviolent public demonstrations that attracted
world attention and brought Palestinians in contact with the western
world, Palestinian eyes were opened. They saw that Israel was viewed as
the victim, despite that it was the region's most powerful military, and
the only regional nuclear power. Since then, Palestinians have
recognized the need to compete at public relations, but are still light
years away from succeeding in the field.

Examples of Palestinian PR failures are not hard to find. It is my view,
for example, that the suicide attacks on Israeli civilians that have
characterized the latter part of this intifada are not only morally
wrong, but a terrible public relations error, particularly in light of
the international hypersensitivity to attacks on civilians following
September 11. Palestinians have suffered from negative stereotypes about
Arabs and Muslims, and these stereotypes are now enjoying resurgence.
Israel uses those images to obscure and justify its occupation, and
Palestinians have been unable as yet to convey the essence of their
struggle--a quest for life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.

In another devastating miscalculation, after the failed Camp David
talks, Palestinians did not explain to the world that these talks were
only the beginning, that they had not included concrete and
comprehensive proposals, that significant progress had been achieved and
more discussion was necessary, but instead, they remained silent.
Meanwhile, Israeli and American representatives repeated over and over
that Palestinians had refused the gracious Israeli offer and therefore
brought the talks to a skidding halt.

So much of the tragedy of the last three years rests on that public
relations coup. As soon as the parties went back to talks at Taba weeks
later, Israel did improve upon the positions it presented at Camp David,
thus proving the Palestinians correct in their Camp David stance. But it
was too late. The Israeli government led by Ehud Barak had already
poisoned Palestinian-Israeli relations by stopping implementation of the
Oslo accords and further troop withdrawals, thus leaving the parties
with no arrangement for governing their relations. Violence commenced,
and the world blamed the Palestinians because the Israeli narrative ruled.

One can only conclude that since the international community is so
influential in this conflict and its progression, superpowers like the
United States and Europe bear a great deal of responsibility in avoiding
propaganda, and instead using international legitimacy as their ruler
for judging the parties' actions. This is the only way to neutralize the
effect of the mutual vitriol and allow for an effective third-party role
to intervene and end the suffering of both Palestinians and Israelis.

