It is crucial to understanding the outcomes of a possible war in Iraq to
first examine the sentiments of the Palestinian people and their
leadership. All indications are that Palestinians in general oppose a
United States war on Iraq--not because we are sympathetic to the Iraqi
regime, but because we think war is unfair for the Iraqi people. Since
evidence has not shown that Iraq maintains weapons of mass destruction,
and since the United Nations has come out quite neutral on Iraqi weapons
possession, Palestinians have more ammunition for their belief that the
Iraqi people have the right to be left in peace. In this context, we
believe that such an attack epitomizes United States' hegemony in the
Middle East, polarizing opposing sentiment not only among Palestinians
and the Arab masses, but also among Europeans.

In this way, as in others, the situation today is different than it was
in 1991. For the last 11 years, there has been an embargo imposed on
Iraq. The Americans and British have been continuously raiding the Iraqi
no-fly zone. Why then is it strategically important to have an all-out
war right now? Is the reason to get rid of the personage of Saddam
Hussein, or is it to gain total control of Gulf oil and curb any
European, Japanese, Russian and Chinese influence in the Gulf region, as
well as control the Caspian Sea?

There is only one honest inference: that America today is playing the
hegemonic role of a superpower. The result is that many US allies are
finding themselves in an opposing camp and the Palestinian position is
not an exception; theirs is a position derived from broader public
sentiment.

As to how Palestinians will fare in this war, there are several
possibilities. All depend on the unfolding of events and how this war
takes shape. If the Americans and their allies can get the job done in a
blitzkrieg with minimal cost in American life, deposing Iraqi leader
Saddam Hussein and imposing a "viceroy" on Iraq, then perhaps the
consequences for Palestinians will be light.

The American people have mixed feelings about this war and favor a quick
resolution. Therefore, if the duration of US occupation of Iraq is
prolonged, or if there are heavy American casualties, or if hostilities
rise against the American presence and against American politics in the
Middle East, then I think the US government will face difficulties.

In parallel, the situation in Palestine will deteriorate. Ariel Sharon's
elected government will have a free hand in intensifying the conflict.
He could resort to the expulsion of some symbols of the Palestinian
leadership, be they from Fateh, the secular political factions or Hamas
and Islamic Jihad. We might see a total siege on the occupied
territories, with long hours of curfew imposed by the Israeli army and a
crackdown on the infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority. This is
the extreme scenario.

But if the war in Iraq is limited, and there is the creation of a new
government, possibly even with Hussein himself, then I think that the
Americans will want to deal expediently with the other destabilizing
factors in the Middle East. There will be an intensive diplomatic
onslaught after they finish the job in Iraq to implement the roadmap
initiative. Already, Palestinian President Yasser Arafat has acquiesced
to the idea of nominating a prime minister, as per American, European
and Israeli requests. In one way or another, he now must concede some of
his political power to be reinvested in the prime minister's office.
Second, we could have early elections for the Palestinian Legislative
Council, eventually moving to the interim and final phases of the
roadmap, which include acknowledgement by US President George W. Bush of
an independent Palestinian state.

The contours and shape of that state will be decided after the
Palestinian elections and the appointment of a prime minister, when
Sharon will be forced by the American administration to re-engage in a
political process. Still, the contours of the state will be open to
negotiations. At that point we will be in a situation where the cycle of
violence stops, the Israelis start withdrawing, and there is an easing
of economic tensions. If Arafat is engaging in a context of real
political reward, he will likely take a tougher stand against all kinds
of violence against Israelis. Here we will see a breakthrough.

That is not to say that the negotiations, even in this optimistic
scenario, will be easy. I predict a tortuous task, where we will not be
offered the 1967 borders, and we will not have all settlements
dismantled, and the question of the right of return will be compromised.
This will put the Palestinian leadership in an awkward and critical
position: how to sell this to the Palestinian people.

And, indeed, there are also two scenarios here. The Palestinians could
be sick and tired and feel they have paid enough, with 65 percent
unemployment and almost 60 percent of the population below the poverty
line. Or they may not accept any of this and desire to continue the
Intifada until freedom and independence. Those who carry this notion of
freedom and independence, given the conditions of war in the Middle
East, given the US role in the Middle East and total support for the
Israeli government, will be acting unpragmatically in a new
international context. The Americans will do all that they can to tip
the balance of their actions in Iraq and to try to find a solution for
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict that fits this "new Middle East" and
their own strategic goals.

