United States envoy Anthony Zinni launched his third mission to the
region at a time of unprecedented escalation in Israeli-Palestinian
violence that fully justified his arrival. Yet the visit began under
mixed circumstances.

On the positive side, Zinni encountered a willingness by Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon to forego his demand for seven days total quiet, and to
establish a kind of "diplomatic" committee to balance the
Israeli-Palestinian security committee. The Saudi initiative to exchange
full withdrawal for normalization or "full peace" was also helpful,
insofar as it hinted at greater Arab support for a successful process.

On the other hand, the time gap between announcement in Washington of
the decision to send Zinni, and his actual arrival, was seen in many
circles as enabling Israel to complete its operation of cleaning out
terrorist elements in refugee camps in Ramallah, Bethlehem and the Gaza
Strip. This meant that the nearly inevitable bloody Palestinian
retaliation against Israeli civilians was likely to take place during,
rather than prior to, the Zinni visit, thus potentially neutralizing the
efficacy of his current mission.

The visit also appears to have been timed to facilitate the Middle East
mission of US Vice President Dick Cheney, who needs a measure of quiet
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in order to be able to talk with
Arab leaders about Iraq, as well as to enable the Arab League summit to
convene peacefully in Beirut in late March, with Arafat's participation.
How the US administration will relate to Zinni's mission once these
events are behind him is not altogether clear.

One additional aspect of the situation greeting Zinni will only be
clarified in the coming days. After the bloodshed of recent weeks, are
the Sharon government and the Arafat regime more or less anxious than in
previous visits to end the fighting? Can they both "declare victory" and
start negotiating a ceasefire? Or do internal political considerations
mitigate on both sides against a return to a political process?

In any event, Zinni must begin with an effort to induce Yasir Arafat to
abandon violence convincingly--the Tenet work plan contains a long list
of very specific demands. Here it would be helpful if Zinni could offer
Arafat American political reassurances regarding Israeli acquiescence
with eventual Mitchell Commission demands for a settlement freeze and
Israeli entry into a renewed territorial peace process. These should be
coupled with threats to totally isolate the Palestinian leader
internationally if he does not comply with a ceasefire, and promises of
ample American economic aid if he does.

Turning to Ariel Sharon, Zinni must persuade him to avoid provocative
military acts and to offer reassurances regarding his eventual
commitment to a settlement freeze and to a peace process that involves
territorial concessions. Zinni can try to induce him to move in these
directions by holding out the prospect of a genuine ceasefire by the
Palestinians, coupled with US assistance for Israel in getting out of
its economic recession, and (Vice President Cheney's role) ironclad
guarantees for Israel's security in the event of an American attack on
Iraq.

Yet under the best of circumstances, Arafat is not likely to move
against his own terrorists without adequate political incentives, while
Sharon has no intention of offering these incentives, if at all, until
Palestinian terrorism has stopped. Herein lies Zinni's immediate
dilemma. In this context the only ray of hope may be Israel's agreement
to the diplomatic or "senior" committee, led by Foreign Minister Peres.
Zinni has to encourage Arafat to view this committee's existence as an
added incentive--the thin end of a political wedge--for him to cease
Palestinian terrorism.

Sharon is not anxious to allow the committee to deal with political
issues of substance. But his current political situation requires that
he give Peres a freer hand than in past months. Moreover, he could
conceivably be confronted with the threat of official US displeasure.
Pressuring Sharon would undoubtedly not be an easy course for
Washington, given American domestic constraints. But it could eventually
become vital if the US wants to make its case persuasively to the Arab
world regarding current and potential sources of terrorism--Iraqi,
Palestinian and other.

To sum up, if Zinni is going to have a chance to succeed in bringing
about a genuine and stable ceasefire, his brief must address the
following strategic reality: Neither Palestine Liberation Organization
leader Yasir Arafat nor Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon has a
genuine strategy for peace. Under the best of circumstances they might
somehow be maneuvered reluctantly into a stabilizing reduction of
violence. For this to happen, Zinni must exercise pressure on them. And
in order to pressure them, he needs an expanded presidential mandate
made up of a number of carrots and sticks that touch upon political as
well as security issues.

Yet there is little in the current picture to indicate that the Bush
administration has decided to abandon its standoffish attitude toward
Israeli-Palestinian affairs, and embark upon the kind of deep
involvement described here.

