Throughout recent years of expanded contacts between Israelis and Arabs,
many constructive instances of interfaith dialogue between religious
figures on both sides have been undertaken. In parallel, the blossoming
of the peace process during the '90s produced enhanced contacts between
Israel and the Vatican and additional Christian streams. In the
diaspora, too, Jews, Muslims and Christians have been "dialoguing" as
never before. While it is hard to point to any concrete political fruits
of Jewish-Muslim and other contacts, this religious stream of the peace
process can hardly be blamed for what the mainstream political dialogue
has also failed to accomplish.

Yet these efforts appear negligible when viewed against the backdrop of
extremist religious activity on all sides that seeks to exacerbate the
conflict rather than alleviate it, and that advances mutually
incompatible agendas. The overwhelming mass of religious energy
currently being invested in the Israeli-Palestinian (and, at a more
abstract level, Israel-Arab) conflict constitutes a very dangerous
zero-sum game.

Regarding Islam and Judaism, the situation needs little elaboration. On
the Palestinian and Arab side, Hamas, Islamic Jihad and Hizballah, with
financing from Iran, Saudi Arabia, and elsewhere, pursue an agenda of
liberating the entire holy land, deemed the property of the Islamic
religious endowments, from Israeli control. The only compromise
conceivable for the Islamist approach is a temporary, tactical one that
could postpone but not cancel achievement of this goal. All Israelis,
including women and children, are legitimate targets. There is plenty of
evidence that Yasir Arafat, though leader of an ostensibly secular
movement, subscribes to the Islamist notion that Jews are not a people
and have no legitimate national roots in a land that is Islamic by
divine determination.

On the Israeli side the conquest, occupation and settlement since 1967
of Judea and Samaria--lands that in many aspects constitute the "cradle
of Hebrew civilization"--have generated a fundamentalist Jewish movement
that invokes the darker side of Jewish law to justify denying
Palestinians the right of self-determination in what is for them, too,
an ancient homeland. At best, Arabs can remain on the land as tolerated
guests enjoying some sort of limited autonomy and expatriate citizenship
in Jordan--but only if they "behave themselves" and respect the Jews'
right to settle in their midst. Here, too, there is little room for
compromise. Over the years, the religious-ideological settler movement
has achieved political influence, with Labor as well as Likud
governments, far out of proportion to its numbers.

Somewhat less well known, particularly in the Middle East, is the
involvement in the conflict of Christian Evangelicals in western
countries, and particularly the United States, where they reputedly
number 70 million. Alongside their assistance to Israel in absorbing
immigrants and their general support for Zionism, the Evangelicals have
a very specific, and indeed very sinister agenda in mind, and they seek
to further it by aiding and abetting the most extreme Israeli factions
and in some cases the "lunatic fringe." There is simply no other way to
characterize active Evangelical support for the settlement movement and
even for that tiny handful of Israelis that wishes to destroy the
mosques on the Temple Mount and rebuild the Temple.

There is every reason to believe that the Evangelical leadership
understands that the policies it supports will only encourage more
hatred and strife in the region; destroying the mosques, in particular,
is a formula for something akin to "world war" in the Middle East.
Indeed, the Evangelicals' agenda for the end of days requires that the
entire holy land go up in smoke ("Armagedon") and that two thirds of the
Jews die (while the other third become Christian when Jesus Christ
reappears). They are actively encouraging a program of death and
destruction for the region, in the course of which Israel will have to
become a kind of South African-type apartheid state and a major
conflagration will take place.

Ultimately, the Evangelicals do not want a Jewish, democratic Israel.
Unlike other allies and supporters of Israel, they intervene in its
domestic politics by supporting and financing extremists. Nevertheless,
some Israelis and American Jews feel comfortable accepting their
support, allegedly because Israel's situation is so critical, because in
any case the Evangelical agenda is deemed apocryphal and harmless, and
because Evangelical influence extends deep into the Bush administration,
which supports Israel enthusiastically. In fact, for Israel to cooperate
actively with the Evangelicals is lunacy--it is writing a new chapter in
the March of Folly.

It is perhaps noteworthy that Muslim and Christian religious extremists
project a fate of death, destruction and conversion for the Jewish
people, while Jewish religious extremists do not foster a similar
attitude toward Muslims or Christians; Israeli Jewish extremists
essentially just want to have the land and be left alone. This is a
point in favor of relative Jewish moderation, but it is lost in a sea of
hatred (or, in the Evangelical case, poisonous "love").

The scope of this religious extremist activism completely dwarfs the
valiant dialogue efforts of religious moderates, and threatens to engulf
us all. From this standpoint it would be best if we could simply get God
out of the conflict.

