From the political point of view, the Israeli-Palestinian peace process
was jump-started with the signing of the Oslo Accords
                  . A famous handshake between two enemies raised hopes
for a peaceful future, close at hand. Since then, it has become clear
that such diplomatic efforts alone are insufficient to bring peace to
the Israeli and Palestinian communities who have been adversaries for so
many years.

Political leaders may attempt, and occasionally succeed, to conclude
agreements about borders, water and security, but their efforts, vital
as they may be, are conducted in the rarefied atmosphere of high level
international diplomacy. They do not directly advance reconciliation
between peoples. In order to create a just and stable peace between
Israelis and Palestinians, individuals, communities and civil
institutions must join hands with the diplomats to facilitate deep
changes in attitudes. The way to do this is to design, implement and
participate in creative joint activities that challenge existing
stereotypes.

Even the most honest, good faith implementation of political agreements
cannot repair the chiasmic psychological, emotional and educational
fault lines opened after years of conflict. If left unattended, these
"black holes" can swallow up years of hard diplomatic effort. Our
painful experience has taught us that we have no choice but to recognize
the educational system as playing a strategic role in the political
process. This is important for two reasons.

First, the education systems can only be used as a means for
dissemination of peace if their legitimacy as shapers of attitudes is
restored and recognized by political leaders. Addressing these issues on
the strategic level shows to the peoples on both sides that ultimately
it is their commitment to peace and reconciliation that will assure the
outcome of the political process. If the political leaders fail to
recognize the role of the educational institutions in the process and in
future stability, how can we expect the next generation to put its faith
in that same system? Already we witness the strong negative effects of
the mass media, as the issue of incitement is raised as a tool for each
side to de-legitimize the other. If we do not recognize educational
institutions as vehicles to create and affect society, we leave a vacuum
for others, proponents of hate and conflict, to fill.

Secondly, in trying to create stability in a region so wounded and
affected by violence and war, the educational institutions must be seen
as central partners in the rehabilitative process. One of the
fundamental building blocks of a stable reality is an educational system
that enhances the capacities, values and responsibilities of citizens.
This is not a question of how a child learns to perceive his or her
former enemy, but rather a larger question of how a child becomes
capable and confident to provide for his or her future. Peace and
security cannot be guaranteed by security measures alone which, as
necessary as they are, can often antagonize and divide. Such security
measures will serve their purpose if they are enforced in the context of
a civil society, which can exist and flourish only if supported by an
effective and exciting educational system. Thus, politicians and
diplomats will find their efforts frustrated if they do not work
strategically to assure an accommodating educational environment.

What do we mean when we speak of education on the strategic level?
Clearly this does not imply that the political negotiators should begin
to design textbooks or argue over relevant curricula. It also does not
mean that mere lip service should be paid to the need for including
values of understanding and peace within the educational curricula.
These are issues that need to be developed on the professional level,
much as any other strategic area of the negotiations. Creating a
strategic place for the educational systems would mean that just as the
negotiators on all levels consult military experts, economic experts,
diplomatic experts and sometimes health and media experts as well, so
too an educational track should be consulted. Once this is recognized,
then there is a legitimate role for education in implementation, too. A
negotiating and follow-up educational committee should be created
alongside all other such committees.

The content of the educational component of a peace agreement would need
to address the following issues:

    1. How to ensure that schools will be accessible and safe
    environments for all children ages 3-18;

    2. How to provide adequate support (including compensation) for
    teachers to contend with (a) the dynamic changes in the reality, and
    (b) the suffering and trauma of themselves and their students;

    3. How to address issues of a core unified curriculum; to what
    extent is such a curriculum advisable in creating a stable,
    confident and open-minded society;

    4. How to address the role of communications (mainly TV, radio and
    internet) as competitors (with a negative impact) to the formal
    educational systems;

    5. What should be the role of the educational systems in reaching
    out to the communities (mainly parents and informal education);

    6. What shall be the criteria for renewing textbooks; who is in
    charge of monitoring them, and at what frequency?

Any peace process, even if just at the stage of a ceasefire, must
recognize the role of those who stand at the forefront of society day in
and day out--the educators. The questions outlined above require
strategic discussion, as well as policy decisions. These cannot be taken
only at the grassroots level. If we demand of the educational system to
work for the implementation of a peace agreement, including a
detoxification of society from hate and animosity and an enhancing of
skills for non-violent conflict resolution, it is necessary to provide
the leaders of that system with the mandate to do so.

