It has long been debated whether the main driving force behind
Palestinian and Israeli hostilities is religious and sectarian or
nationalist and secular. Emphatic slogans and enthusiastic religious
maxims can at times be manipulated by politicians to achieve political
purposes, and to incite--but sometimes these sentiments are also
genuine. There is a wide and confusing gray area in between.

Certainly, some of the public and some leaders are motivated by
religion. Other motives, however, include political considerations,
nationalism and the economy. Sometimes all of these are mixed in a such
way that it becomes difficult to distinguish the driving force behind
statements or actions. There is no doubt that politicians sometimes use
religious belief to increase support for certain political tendencies.
Theoretically, this is equally true in both Israel and Palestine.

But while today?s conflict includes aspects of both the secular and
religious, at its heart the Palestinian-Israeli dispute is political.
Jewish religious aspirations in Palestine were suddenly (and for
strategic reasons) exploited by superpowers with purely political
motives. These superpowers backed the Zionist trends in Palestine and
allowed them to militarily and politically immigrate and occupy and
control what has now become Israel.

At that time, the Palestinians felt they faced a political and national
sort of problem, which they had just cause to fight. To further that
purpose, Palestinians used religious sentiment and ever since, whenever
the two sides are in a heightened state of tension, the manipulation of
religion and religious feeling has increased. Take, for example, the ?Al
Aqsa Intifada.? It was no coincidence that the spark for the last two
years of confrontation was the visit of extreme right-wing opposition
leader Ariel Sharon to one of the holiest Muslim places of worship.
There is no doubt that Sharon?s visit was motivated by politics, and the
strong Palestinian popular protests afterwards were also politically
motivated. Still, the religious factor in these clashes was emphasized
to the extent that we know now them through a reference to the Al Aqsa
Mosque.

Similarly, in the Camp David negotiations that were the pinnacle of ten
years of peace talks, religious sites and the Jerusalem issue were major
obstacles to reaching a final settlement (they were not, however, the
only impediments).

Historically and fundamentally, religion does not fully explain this
conflict. Indeed, when the religious differences between us become
dominant, then the conflict is not only increasingly complicated, but
irresolvable. That is why both sides must exert efforts to reduce as
much as possible the religious expressions of the conflict and use
secular criteria in establishing what is right and wrong and
consequently, in finding a solution. In this regard, emphasizing
international legality and its guidance towards a negotiated solution
offers more hope and more possibilities and neutralizes ideological
factors of the kind that do not allow compromise.

According to international law, there should be an exchange of peace for
an end to the Israeli occupation. Ending that occupation must be based
on Security Council Resolution 242, which stipulates the inadmissibility
of the acquisition of land by force. Whatever sites--religious or
historical--that sit on the eastern side of the
internationally-recognized border of 1967 must fall under Palestinian
legal and political control. Whatever historical and religious sites
that happen to fall on the western side of the 1967 border must fall
under Israeli political and legal control. It is crucial, however, that
religious control and jurisdiction is respected by both sides for the
other side. In other words, religious rights and control should not
become a pretext for establishing political control (any given religious
area can be under the sovereignty of a state, while remaining under the
religious jurisdiction of its believers).

There should be a clear separation between religious administration and
political jurisdiction. There are stipulations in international law that
regulate all kinds of rights, including religious rights, and these must
be respected by both sides.

