United States envoy Anthony Zinni arrived in the region during a climax
in confrontations. The Israeli campaign of entering Palestinian refugee
camps and adjacent towns had reached Palestinian President Yasser
Arafat's doorstep and the town that Palestinians consider the
Palestinian Authority political capital. That timing, in itself, gives
this visit great significance and importance.

And in truth, whether Palestinians and Israelis are optimistic or
pessimistic about Zinni's most recent visit, they are all desperate for
any American initiative. It is still early, however, to offer sufficient
analysis of the chances for success, since Zinni has not yet disclosed
whether he has come to the region carrying new equipment or not. There
are, however, a few signs of change.

Previously, Zinni did not succeed because he adopted the Israeli
prescription of how to "end the violence" and showed very little
sensitivity to the Palestinian perspective. For example, he accepted
Sharon's condition of seven days of calm to be judged by the Israeli
side, as well as the Israeli condition of "ceasefire first," which came
at the expense of the integrity of the Mitchell committee
recommendations. Then, when this prescription did not work, Zinni
appeared to give the Israeli side a chance to further pressure
Palestinians, in the hopes that this would soften their position and
make them more recipient to his specific ideas.

In fact, the main difference between the situation now and then is the
tremendous pressure Israel has put on Palestinians in the interim. Not
only has the violent squeezing of Palestinians not achieved its
objectives, but it has actually backfired, further proving the
Palestinian claim that more Israeli military pressure will only invite
more Palestinian resistance and political rigidity. In addition, the
application of pressure through violence has improved the Palestinian
political and international position and put Israel on the defensive in
the international arena.

Further, the intensity of the Israeli brutality and increasing
Palestinian casualties has provoked the Arab street and put the some of
the Arab regimes that are close to the United States government in an
embarrassing position. That factor has been greatly multiplied in light
of the American need to create an atmosphere in the Arab world that is
conducive to possible American intervention in Iraq.

As such, concrete deliberations between Zinni and Palestinian
politicians seem to show two changes in Zinni's position, as compared
with that of previous visits. First, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
has cancelled his demand for seven days of quiet. Second, Zinni seems
willing to accommodate the Palestinian requirement that security issues
not be separated from political progress by accepting that the
negotiations follow two simultaneous tracks carried out by two
committees, one dealing with security and another with political talks.

But this is by no means a significant change. On the contrary, it is
very artificial. If the Palestinian Authority thinks that this is an
achievement, it will soon realize that the security committee has
concrete tasks to pursue and specific terms of reference as laid out in
the Tenet work plan, while the political committee has no chance of
progress due to the lack of specific and agreed-upon terms of reference.
The political gap between the two sides, especially under the government
of Ariel Sharon, is currently unbridgeable. Therefore, what is bound to
happen is that Palestinians will be required to implement the Tenet work
plan, which brings an end to Palestinian "violence", without getting
anything in return on the political front. The result will be ensured
peace and security for the ongoing Israeli military occupation, which
will remain untouched in the scope of Zinni's expected efforts.

The ongoing violence and Palestinian resistance is a natural and
inevitable outcome of the Israeli occupation and its
manifestations--siege, economic sanctions, assassinations, demolition of
houses and confiscation of land--as well as the political vacuum and
absence of a serious political initiative bringing Palestinians hope of
an imminent end to the Israeli occupation.

In other words, the political realities combining the unbearable Israeli
occupation alongside a failed peace process that transferred the
Palestinian-Israeli relationship to one of bloody confrontation will
remain as long as American efforts are not serious enough to change
these realities and bring pressure to bear on the Israeli government to
alter its positions that remain incompatible with the peace process,
which is an exchange of an end to the Israeli occupation for
peace.

