As Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon approaches the first anniversary
of his initiative to unilaterally withdraw settlers and forces from the
Gaza Strip and northern West Bank, his plan faces formidable political
and security challenges that cast growing doubt on its eventual
implementation.

When the Knesset returned to session last week Sharon entered
parliamentary trench warfare, facing two legislative tasks: gaining
approval for his disengagement plan, and passing the 2005 budget bill.
He failed his first, albeit largely symbolic, test as the Knesset voted
to reject his statement combining the two controversial issues.

This unexpected failure led many analysts to wonder if Sharon, the
former political wizard, has grown weary and lost his magic. After all,
he has lost every political trial since unveiling his plan. In May, the
Likud members' referendum rejected it. In June, Sharon had to amend the
details and delay the actual decision on settlement removal in order to
get Cabinet approval. Then in August his party convention blocked the
entrance of the Labor party to the coalition, a necessary step for
widening the plan's support base.

In the current chaotic state of Israel's political system--a byproduct
of the withdrawal design--Sharon rules over a minority government,
backed by 58 or 59 out of 120 Knesset members, and must form an ad-hoc
coalition for every legislative move. His strategy has been "divide and
conquer": leaning on the left wing opposition to pass the disengagement
resolutions (both the plan's endorsement in principle, and a settler
evacuation-compensation bill), then turning right for the budget process.

By sheer head counting, Sharon is expected to win the disengagement
votes easily. His problem, however, lies within his party, where the
anti-withdrawal "rebels" form an effective block of 15 out of 40 MKs.
Alongside them, senior figures like ministers Binyamin Netanyahu, Sylvan
Shalom and Limor Livnat are torn between their loyalty to Sharon and
their need to please the Likud's central committee, which determines the
party's candidate list. The troika formally supports Sharon's plan,
while trying to dilute it through compromise. Recently, the three joined
the settler opposition's call for holding an unprecedented national
referendum over the plan.

Israeli law demands a referendum before giving away "sovereign areas"
(i.e., the Golan or East Jerusalem), but not over occupied territories
like Gaza. The settlers--backed by threats of violent protest and
rabbinic appeals for massive refusal on the part of religious soldiers
to obey orders to carry out the evacuation--now call upon Sharon to "ask
the public". The prime minister hesitates, citing the inevitable delay
in implementation, and probably fearing another defeat by the
better-organized opposition. But pressure is mounting, and there are
hints he may rethink his position.

Sharon has clearly underestimated the intra-Likud resistance to his
idea. In this regard, in the past year an Israeli political myth--the
image of the ruling party's apparatus as a crowd of cynical
benefit-seekers--was proven wrong. As it happened the Likudniks appeared
as a strongly ideological group, opposing any land concessions as
"rewarding Palestinian terrorism".

Terrorism is Sharon's second, no less complicated problem. In recent
weeks, the Gaza front erupted in violent escalation. Palestinian Qassam
rockets that killed two toddlers in the Israeli town of Sderot generated
in response a fierce, 17-day-long IDF operation in northern Gaza, in
which 129 Palestinians were killed--among them at least 42 civilians--at
the cost of the lives of three Israelis. When it ended, Israeli forces
left the Palestinian towns and redeployed in a "security zone" outside
them.

The violent events exposed the inherent paradox in Sharon's plan: in
order to get out of the despised Gaza region, Israel is getting deeper
into it. The unilateral idea of leaving a "security vacuum" on the other
side, without a credible authority to assure security and quiet,
threatens to turn disengagement into a bloody mess, with Hamas and
others trying to hit at the departing Israelis. Keeping a "security
zone" in post-withdrawal Gaza, no matter how narrow, is a recipe for
ongoing violence, undermining Israel's claim to "end the occupation".

Sharon knows this all too well, and repeatedly says he ordered the IDF
to "prevent withdrawal under fire". It is still unclear, however, how
this task can be achieved without coordination with a Palestinian
interlocutor. But given the precedence of the political test, the
security challenges will be dealt with later.

Sharon scheduled the disengagement votes to conclude before the American
presidential election, and plans a US trip in mid-November. The United
States is expected to show more involvement after the election no matter
who wins, and Sharon will be asked to deliver on his still unfulfilled
pledges to remove illegal West Bank outposts and freeze settlement
construction. Winning the disengagement votes with a credible majority
would probably give him more room to maneuver vis-a-vis the Americans
and the increasingly impatient Europeans. Therefore his domestic battle
is also a diplomatic one.

