An active role by France and other powers that maintain a measure of
objectivity vis-a-vis the Palestinian Israeli conflict is welcome and
indeed essential for reviving the peace process. (That is not to say
that the position of the United States does not remain very important,
despite frustrations with its hopelessly biased and blindly pro-Israel
policy. The chances of any initiative's success would be immensely
improved if it gets US support.) Therefore, the French initiative is an
interesting development that should be analyzed carefully and its
content, context and timing properly understood. I will first take issue
with the content.

The first objective of the proposed elections is to support the
"popular" legitimacy of the Palestinian National Authority--unfairly
putting a question mark on that legitimacy--in order to enable it to
crack down on the "extremists." This places the onus of responsibility
in the present confrontation on the Palestinians and disregards the fact
that successive Israeli governments have not only not cracked down on
Israeli extremists, i.e. the settlers, but encouraged them and afforded
them protection.

The second objective is to confirm that a large Palestinian majority
indeed subscribes to the principles underlying the peace process. This
disregards the fact that the present Palestinian authority was elected
on a peace platform. It also disregards the fact that the present
Israeli government and its prime minister, who is a confessed opponent
of "the principles underlying the peace process," has been elected with
the largest majority of Israeli popular vote in any Israeli elections
since 1967.

The third objective, that of re-instilling in Israelis the feeling that
the "other camp" is largely in favor of peace, disregards the fact that
the Palestinians are the side that need to be reassured of the peaceful
intentions of the other camp. It is a fact that there are members in the
present Israeli government who are outspoken advocates of transfer, i.e.
eviction of Palestinians from their ancestral homeland.

If this non-paper is intended for both sides, then the facts tell that
it is the Israeli side that should be called upon to hold elections in
the hope of achieving this proposal's stated objectives. After all, is
it not a fact that the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) leads the
Palestinian peace camp?

In summary, the objectives stated in support of elections are not
convincing. I very much doubt that their authors missed the obvious
points made above.

As for declaring a state as a way of ending the Intifada, this would be
an exercise in self-deceit, as a state under occupation changes nothing
in the present situation. At best, it would take us back to September
2000, when such a declaration was contemplated and set aside for
well-known reasons. Renewal of Palestinian society's commitment to
building a state is a worthy objective. While we should accept
responsibility for many of our failures and shortcomings, it remains a
fact that Israel, by constantly undermining the prospects for peace and
stability through settlement activity and by dragging its feet on
interim agreements, has been destroying everything built by the PNA
since Oslo, including economic and security institutions.

It should be obvious now that an independent, sovereign and viable
Palestinian state can only come as a result of an expression of the
Palestinian right to self-determination after the end of occupation, and
not as a result of an agreement with Israel while occupation continues.

The problem that I have with the French non-paper is that it has
drawbacks that are too obvious to have been overlooked by its authors. I
am inclined to think that France and other European countries are only
trying to flesh out the so-called Peres-Abu Ala' non-paper, which
explains the timing. The French non-paper does that in probably the only
way in which the Israelis and Americans will not object.

If so, a reminder is in order: the present Intifada has focused all
Palestinian thinking on the objective of ending occupation. The
initiative has to go much further and probably take a different
direction. The root cause of the conflict is not the Intifada or
inadequate governance, but occupation. There are ambiguities in the
so-called Peres-Abu Ala' non-paper that could be addressed and side
issues that could be put in their proper context. Instead of doing that,
the French initiative seems to make elections a prerequisite for the
implementation of the Mitchell recommendations. Without derogating from
the merits of elections if held in the right time and under the proper
conditions, the Palestinian side is not the one that needs now a change
in heart or in leadership. The Israeli side does!

