In recent months, under the direction of Foreign Minister Hubert
Vedrine, the French Foreign Ministry has been studying new and original
ways to break out of the current deadlock. This commendable approach has
now produced an initiative that is being seriously considered by the
European Union. While the initiative itself appears to be flawed, the
idea behind it is not: room must be made for a political concept or vision.

In contrast, the United States' approach, as embodied in the
Tenet/Mitchell recommendations, gives primacy to a ceasefire and offers
no political "horizon." After nearly 18 months of violence, this
approach must be judged a failure. Elsewhere in the world, when a state
encounters a determined liberation struggle, the parties usually end up
shooting and talking at the same time. This is what must happen here. In
this sense, the French have got it right.

But the French plan itself is short on logic. The idea of declaring a
Palestinian state and holding elections as a confidence builder for the
peace process--a kind of political jolt designed to break the spiral of
violence and reintroduce political concepts--appears to ignore a number
of key issues. Incidentally, so does the so-called Peres-Abu Alaa plan
to jumpstart the process by declaring a Palestinian state. That
initiative has almost certainly influenced the French plan.

The problems can be summed up in a series of questions. They more or
less follow the chronological order of the French plan:

1. Why would the Sharon government agree to withdraw Israeli forces to
their pre-September 2000 positions in order to enable elections, while
Palestinian terrorist attacks continue? Doesn't there have to be a
genuine ceasefire first? And doesn't this take us full circle back to
the Tenet and Mitchell plans? If, on the other hand, the outlines of
final status were already known--whether achieved through negotiations
held under fire or imposed by the international community--then it would
be logical to withdraw to enable elections.

2. Assuming elections were held under current circumstances, why would
Arafat and Fateh campaign on a platform of peace rather than one of
ongoing struggle, given that there is no agreed peace plan or concept?

3. Assuming they did campaign on a platform of peace, would Palestinian
voters support them, considering the current atmosphere and the legacy
of the past year and a half? Why would elections necessarily (as the
French initiative claims) "support the Palestinian Authority's popular
legitimacy in its efforts to crack down on the extremist movements"?
Isn't the Authority already an elected body? Aren't the extremist
organizations likely to boycott these elections, as they did in 1996?

4. Assuming a Palestinian state is declared now, why should it function
any better than the current Palestinian Authority? Won't the leadership
of Arafat and his cronies just perpetuate existing corruption,
toleration of violence and lack of credibility?

5. In other words, what is the basis for the assumption that Palestinian
elections and statehood implemented now would make a difference to the
atmosphere, jumpstart a political process, and (as the French proposal
claims) "trigger the psychological effect that could justify ending the
Intifada"? What is the logic of this cause and effect relationship?

6. Finally, one must ask why this proposal, like the Peres-Abu Alaa
scheme and so many others, insists on ignoring three key lessons of
Oslo? First, you can't base renewed territorial negotiations on United
Nations Security Council Resolution 242 without first reaching agreement
on its meaning (essentially, whether withdrawal is from "territories" or
"the territories"). Secondly, phasing tends to destroy confidence rather
than build it, particularly when the parameters of the final phase
remain undefined. Third, Israel and the Palestinians need a compulsory
arbitration clause in any agreed scheme, like the one that rescued the
Israel-Egypt peace process over Taba. In short, we cannot afford another
failed peace process based on so-called constructive ambiguities.

At the level of international realpolitik, this initiative will
certainly fail unless the Europeans succeed in enlisting the support of
the United States. This would also have the commendable effect of
uniting rather than dividing the western alliance over a key Middle East
issue.

In this sense, European energies would be better employed in merging the
French initiative with a modified version of the Clinton proposals of
December 2000 and packaging them as a new UN Security Council
resolution, designed to articulate the parameters of 242, and binding
upon the parties. The US, and indeed the Arab countries as well, would
be hard put to reject such an initiative. The growing body of Israelis
who want to save their country from destruction from within by
disengaging from occupation would have an internationally backed flag to
rally around. So would Palestinians looking for a way out of the current
cycle of death and destruction. We could indeed begin talking
constructively while we shoot.

