The persistence of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is having a direct
and significant impact upon the development of democracy in both
societies. Israel is a country with thousands of intellectuals in a wide
range of fields. Still, since 1974 all of Israel's prime ministers have
been military leaders. Ehud Barak, Benjamin Netanyahu and Yitzhak Shamir
were either generals and/or ranking members of Israel's special forces
and intelligence services. This is militarization at its heart. It seems
very clear today that Israel is under the influence of a silent coup
d'etat where the military dominates politics, as well as the texture and
quality of democratic life.

Doubters should pick up the new book,/ Wars Don't Just Happen/, by Motti
Golani, which details Israel's culture of power. "Since the creation of
the State of Israel in 1948, its leadership has generally preferred to
use force to solve problems, not all of which have been life-and-death
issues," writes Golani, as quoted in Ha'aretz. The consequences of this
approach are visible in the Israeli political system, where Israel's
ongoing military posture is strengthening the executive, to the
detriment of the legislative. Israel has a democratic system, but it is
what one might call an ethnic democracy, where "tribalism" rules. The
only way to escape this situation is to institute reforms. If the United
States is the model, only after the mid-1960s and the acceptance of
civic society and multiculturalism did democracy in the United States
flourish.

On the Palestinian side, the continuation of the conflict is directly
and blatantly responsible for the rise and strengthening of radical
Muslim movements that do not accept liberal democratic values in the
universal sense. Here I am differentiating between political Islam and
Islam the religion. The faith of Islam includes Sufis who are complete
pacifists, as well as the Osama bin Ladins of this world who divide
humanity into two groups: Muslims and the rest. The Palestinian
opposition group Hamas does not see things black and white in this
manner, but it also does not share in a vision of democracy that
incorporates liberal democratic values.

Another effect of the conflict is that it is making more and more
Palestinians poor, at least for the moment. There is a correlation
between education, income and democracy and it has been shown that
poverty and democracy are not highly compatible.

But the protraction of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict is not only
having a detrimental effect on democracy's development in Palestinian
society, but democracy in the entire Arab world. These acts of terror in
Morocco and Riyadh are at least in part related to the continuation of
outstanding Palestinian claims.

Simultaneously, the conflict is preventing real debate. In my own
personal example, at the end of 2001, a visitor from the Palestinian
security services came to my house late at night. He never mentioned my
name per se, but the conversation centered on his opinion that this
Intifada is a time of war and that in war, the rules of the game are
changed. He told me that in such times, "we" cannot tolerate Birzeit
professors using their positions at the university to criticize the
Palestinian president. This argument has been used throughout the Arab
world during periods--like today--when Arab states have been under
attack. In the din of battle, all other voices are expected to stay
silent.

