Israel is scoring an impressive string of tactical victories over
Palestinian terrorism. Against a daily list of anywhere from 30 to 70
suicide bombing alerts, the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and the Shabak
(General Security Service) succeed in preventing over 95 percent of the
attacks. In this endeavor they have developed real time systems for
coordinating sophisticated aerial, electronic and human intelligence
with the soldier in the field--systems that are studied by security
establishments all over the world. Hamas' inability to mount a series of
suicide bombing "punishments" against Israel in the aftermath of the
assassination of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin offers striking confirmation of
this achievement.

As Brigadier General Gadi Shamni put it in early March 2004, upon
completion of his tour of duty as IDF Gaza commander: "We are winning in
this conflict. In the military arena we are winning every day, several
times."

But that is precisely the problem: if you have to win several times a
day, then your repeated victories are tactical rather than strategic;
they have little or no cumulative effect. One of Shamni's senior
officers grasped the problem a few weeks earlier, when he noted that the
IDF had "defeated all the terrorist gangs in Gaza save one: the entire
population."

In other words, there is no military solution, no strategic military
"victory" against a popular insurrection provoked by prolonged
occupation. You cannot "win" this war unless you win the peace as well.

Outgoing Israel Air Force commander Dan Halutz recently defined victory
as "bringing about a situation wherein the political echelon is free to
take decisions without terror-induced constraints." Mission
accomplished. The only constraints Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
is operating under appear to be political and judicial, not terror-induced.

That is why he is changing the rules of the game. What Sharon's
disengagement plan from the Gaza Strip seeks to do is declare victory
and withdraw.

But this will be a hollow victory. While disengagement is a way of
improving the security situation, deflating the conflict and preserving
Israel as a Jewish and democratic state, it cannot replace a peaceful
political solution. Moreover, Sharon appears to view withdrawal from
Gaza and a small part of the West Bank as a way of tightening Israel's
grip on most of the West Bank, where he will, in effect, declare victory
and stay. This will hardly contribute to a reduction in the conflict there.

Israeli disengagement can be seen as a tactical victory for the
Palestinians, too--but not a strategic triumph. The Palestinians can
correctly conclude from Israel's withdrawal plans that the Jewish state
only respects force--it is reasonable to assume that, had Gaza remained
tranquil over the past three years, Sharon would not have undertaken to
withdraw--and that they have also won the "battle of the bedroom," i.e.,
victory in the demographic war. But Israel is leaving an "asset" that
most Israelis never valued anyway; the withdrawal in no way implies that
force will push Israelis out of Ashkelon or Ashdod. And the Palestinian
population growth rate, now among the highest in the world, impoverishes
an already desperate people and renders real social, economic and
political well being for Palestinians a distant dream for more than a
generation to come. This is a heavy price to pay for "victory".

Unless we alter our entire value system and determine that wholesale
martyrdom, i.e., death, constitutes victory, then for Palestinians, too,
the only reasonable way to win a victory is to win an equitable peace.
That means a "win-win" situation. And for that to happen we need leaders
who have realistic strategies for winning the peace rather than mere
tactics for winning battles in the war.

Neither Sharon nor Yasser Arafat qualifies.

Hence, for the time being we'll have to settle for tactical victories.
Disengagement, if carried out without foreclosing political options, is
the best idea in a narrow field.

