The truth is that the term "ceasefire" has no relevance in the current
Israeli-Palestinian confrontations. The situation here is one where a
belligerent illegal military occupation is being imposed by virtue of
force on the Palestinian people who, as a result, are deprived of their
basic rights including all of the important rights that derive from
citizenship under a government, including the right to self-determination.

Consequently, the Palestinian people have resisted this occupation since
its start in 1967. During that time, the resistance has taken on
different forms. Sometimes Palestinian resistance has been one of armed
struggle, while at other times--such as the first Intifada that began in
1987 with a groundswell of popular protest activities and civil
disobedience--it has taken the shape of non-violent demonstration.
Indeed, the only period in which there was no Palestinian resistance,
especially a violent resistance, was the years of the peace process. The
reason for that calm was that the Palestinian people were under the
impression that this peace process would end the Israeli
occupation--exactly what they had been fighting for. Israeli journalist
Danny Rubinstein noted just days before the outbreak of the current
phase of confrontation on September 29, 2000 that the most recent
Palestinian attack had occurred four years before.

With this history in mind, for Palestinians to call a "ceasefire" now
means to express willingness to live peacefully with the Israeli
occupation, an occupation that is violent not only in the traditional
sense in that its army shoots and kills Palestinians, but is violent at
its heart. Because even when the Israeli army's guns are completely
silent, the occupation continues to forcefully restrict the rights of
the Palestinian people.

One must never be fooled; the Israeli occupation is about the forceful
confiscation of Palestinian land to build more settlements for expanding
Israel's presence on the land. The occupation is about the forceful
demolition of Palestinian homes to erase Palestinian roots and
historical claims. The occupation is about the violent restriction of
Palestinian thought, political expression and political leadership. As
such, the only way to have real calm and security and safety is if there
is a real exchange: an end to this violent occupation in return for an
end for an end to Palestinian violence.

To discuss a ceasefire in the sense of stopping all shooting at one
another only makes sense in the context of a meaningful political
process based on relevant international law and legality. That process
should give the impression to both Palestinians and Israelis that it is
truly concerned with producing a political settlement that will give
Israelis their legitimate right to peace, security and economic
prosperity, and Palestinians their legitimate right to
self-determination, independence, liberty, an end to the occupation and,
of course, economic prosperity.

If there is such a process, the call for a ceasefire will make sense,
first because it will be possible and convincing and second, because it
will create a process that is vital to both sides. That is why all tries
at a ceasefire in isolation of a meaningful political have failed,
including American government attempts through Central Intelligence
Agency Director George Tenet and US envoy Anthony Zinni. Everything that
has been tried has separated the security components from the other
aspects of this conflict. There will be no meaningful ceasefire until
there is an end to the occupation on the one hand and the realization of
Palestinian self-determination on the other.

