The premise of the Oslo process was that, since the Israelis have failed
to govern the territories successfully (Jews seem to be unfit for an
occupying role), they should find a suitable Palestinian to do it
effectively, someone who, in the words of the late Yitzhak Rabin, can
act "without the High Court and without B'Tselem" (i.e., would not be
troubled by its citizens having recourse to the High Court and civil
rights organizations). Israelis were led to believe that Arafat suited
the role of leader who could establish a Palestinian entity that would
have good neighborly relations with Israel.

This did not work very well, primarily because of Arafat's governing
style and political ambitions. He was unwilling to suppress the armed
opposition groups (Hamas and Islamic Jihad) that continued to engage in
terrorism against Israel. Moreover, the Palestinian Authority (PA)
expanded its own military capabilities by an increase in the number of
armed soldiers and by equipping them with mortars, anti-tank weapons and
man portable anti-aircraft missiles, all in flagrant violation of signed
agreements with Israel. In fact, Arafat allowed the PA and its security
organs to turn into what Israel Defense Force Chief of General Staff
Shaul Mofaz called "a terrorist entity," which holds radical aspirations
such as the relocation of numerous Palestinian refugees to Israel.

Arafat seems unable to rule, i.e., to maintain a modicum of law and
order in the territories under his control. We are witnessing the
beginning of the "Lebanonization" of the PA, which is indicated by the
emergence of a myriad of armed groups displaying only partial loyalty to
Arafat. In addition, the deteriorating economic situation generated by
limited access to the Israeli market creates demands upon the PA, which
it is unable to meet, furthering the erosion in its authority and
legitimacy.

Such challenges are reinforced by widespread Palestinian perceptions of
the ruling elite as corrupt and authoritarian. The PA increasingly fails
to provide basic needs, such as personal security and a minimum standard
of living for its citizens. We may soon see the breakdown of the PA into
several cantons effectively ruled by new barons, who have almost full
monopoly over arms in their fiefdoms. The PA may well turn into a failed
state.

The desire to prevent the anarchical characteristic of failed states is
understandable and this is the main motivation for the attempts to save
and strengthen Arafat. Yet the belief that Arafat can change and behave
reasonably, or that a strong PA is beneficial for Israel, is questionable.

In short, Arafat and his coterie are part of the problem and not of the
solution. Therefore, we should think about a third option (in addition
to Israeli occupation and Arafat's rule)--chaos. This is not a pleasant
thought. Chaos in the territories poses a security problem to Israel.
Such a problem is less acute if the fragmented Palestinian armed groups
do not coordinate their low-intensity conflict against Israel. Anarchy
in the territories may allow Israel a freer hand in dealing with the
terrorists.

Indeed, a situation of chaos might ultimately yield positive results.
The collapse of the PA will weaken the young Palestinian national
movement. Palestinian nationalism has been a source of endemic violence
in the past and is a recipe for regional instability in the future. It
threatens at least two "nice" states--Israel and Jordan--and has
continuously supported policies of radical regimes such as Iraq and
Libya. It is also thoroughly anti-American.

The collapse of the PA and the failure of the Palestinian national
movement to establish a successful state might reduce the appetite of
the Palestinians for an independent entity. Although failures rarely
affect the political fortunes of Arab leaders (as with Egyptian
President Gamel Abdul Nasser or Iraqi President Saddam Hussein), Arafat
as a symbol of the Palestinian national movement might be seriously
tainted in the case of the PA falling apart, and this could bring to the
forefront a more realistic and conciliatory leadership.

It is misleading to portray Hamas as the only alternative to Arafat. It
is his current ally. Moreover, the disintegration of the PA would be a
public relations debacle for the Palestinians and would elicit greater
understanding in the world for Israeli fears of its destructive
implications.

Disorder in the territories could be the incentive for fresh thinking on
the Palestinian issue on the part of the Palestinians, as well as
elsewhere. More chaos in the Palestinian-ruled territories might open up
new opportunities to stabilize the situation. The internecine violence
of the previous Intifada led to acceptance of the Madrid conference
formula--a clear indication of growing political realism among the
Palestinians. The failed PA experiment could be a sobering experience
leading to a more politically mature body politic.

Chaos as an interim situation is not necessarily the worst-case
scenario. Therefore, Israel might have an interest in Arafat taking a
fall.

