When discussing the Palestinian National Authority (PNA), one should
differentiate between the significance of its existence as a moral
entity for the Palestinian people - the first authority established on
parts of Palestine - and its performance. Has the Palestinian Authority
succeeded, after seven years of building institutions and bodies yearned
for by Palestinians for decades, to rest itself on the proper
institution-building foundations and the supports of freedom, democracy,
equality and justice for individuals?

Primarily, support for existence of this authority comes from the
principle of its existence, not the physical role it fulfills for the
Palestinian people. It does not meet the requirements of real
institutions despite its various ministries, which after seven years of
establishment, have proven unable to adopt decisions independent of the
power of the individual symbol represented in President Yasser Arafat.

This situation applies to both the executive and legislative
authorities, as both are governed by the desires of this symbol. They do
not stray beyond his orders and his instructions, the limits required to
gain his devotion. The same situation applies to the legal authority,
which is nearly non-existent and where judges act according to
instructions received by higher-ups.

In many cases, we find the court system paralyzed and unable to
implement even its own decisions. This is felt through the multiple
decisions issued by the Palestinian legal system on specific political
cases, in which the legal system was unable to implement its own
decisions. Implementation requires the will of the political symbol that
receives the Authority's absolute loyalty in all of its institutions and
structures. It can be said that this symbol has become the sole
individual running all institutions and structures, starting from the
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and ending with the National
Authority as a political apparatus (not to mention the legislative
institutions, as well as bodies comprising Fatah, the major faction in
PLO).

Still, the Authority, even as it is buffeted by internal, exterior and
regional conditions, plays an essential role for those people who
engaged in decades of struggle and, therefore, earned the opportunity to
build their institutions. As such, the Palestinian National Authority is
vital, regardless of who is currently in charge. It is important to us
that the PNA exists as an entity that has gained legitimacy from that
very Palestinian struggle, one lasting over 50 years. We recognize that,
while people are not eternal, whatever their age, the Authority as an
entity will endure.

In the future, we will undertake the responsibility of transferring it
from this period of weakness and absence of strong institutions to the
stage of state-building, once this authority realizes its sovereignty
and power on the ground. The same is true for the establishment of laws
and bylaws worthy of a unique Palestinian state, including the abolition
of the combination of Egyptian and Jordanian laws and Israeli military
orders now applied to the territories seized in 1967.

It is true that the recent Aqsa Intifada has bridged a gap between the
Palestinian National Authority and the Palestinian masses. But this gap
can be expected to soon widen once again, causing more rifts if the PNA
does not begin building its institutions even during its political
conflict with Israel.

The PNA must take initiative in fighting corruption, corrupt people, and
expediting the process of putting its house in order, making violators
accountable and putting the right person in positions of authority.

The PNA must also choose a path that will qualify it as an entity like
all other entities in the region. It has to determine the route it will
go--either it realizes statehood with all the accompanying symbolic,
political and national connotations, or it remains what it is now:
neither an authority nor a revolution.

Even though we are talking about the National Authority, this does not
exempt the Palestinian factions from their own responsibilities. In the
same manner that the PNA must rid itself of those damaging its
reputation and failing their responsibilities, the factions, too, must
follow through.

If we want to talk about political pluralism within one authority, the
PNA must start reforming corrupt internal practices and extend bridges
to several other political movements, in order to accomplish the shaping
a national unity authority or a national government. This authority must
encompass the hopes of the masses and their aspirations for a real
government that represents them and protect their interests and is
capable of handling the intensifying political confrontation with the
launching of the negotiations process.

