It is clear to all that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has reached a
terrible low point.

About six months ago I proposed, together with former Knesset member Abd
al-Wahab Darawshe and Professor Yosef Ginat, the idea of a "hudna" (an
Arabic term meaning a ceasefire for a limited period). The idea was
embraced by President of Israel Moshe Katzav and by the leadership of
the Palestinian Authority (PA). The concept behind the initiative is to
apply the traditional Arab mechanism for resolving conflicts to the
Israeli-Palestinian dispute. The focus of this mechanism is on honor. We
feel that if we can learn to treat Palestinians with honor we can
register tremendous achievements politically. This sounds simple, but I
am certain that this is the key to solving the problem.

Following are the details of the proposal, as presented to the prime
minister by President Katzav, and as approved by the leadership of the
PA (formal approval by the Palestinian Cabinet was given on Dec. 17, 2001):

Phase I: President Moshe Katzav, leading a delegation of notables, comes
to the Palestinian National Assembly in Ramallah. He delivers a speech
"from heart to heart" and calls upon both peoples immediately to
commence a total ceasefire for a year (hudna). His speech is followed by
a vote in which the Assembly ratifies the hudna.

Phase II begins immediately after the ceremony in Ramallah and continues
for several weeks. Both sides act to return to the status quo ante
September 2000.

Phase III follows (dependent on Israeli approval and on the PA proving
that it is making a 100% effort to activate the hudna): negotiations
commence between Israel and the PA in an attempt to reach a political
settlement--interim or permanent, as decided by the two parties. If the
parties register progress but do not reach agreement during the hudna
period, the Palestinians are committed to extend the hudna for another
year.

I believe with all my heart that realization of this initiative could
open a new era in the Middle East. But Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
declared his rejection of the initiative in late December 2001.

Half a year passed, a terrible half year in which the circle of violence
and suffering expanded and blood was spilled like water on both sides.
We decided not to give up, and to try again to promote a ceasefire. I
must note that we found in Yasir Arafat a serious partner to this
concept. On June 5, 2002 (a somewhat symbolic date) we renewed the
initiative. My good friend Abd al-Wahab Darawshe and I met with Arafat
in his office in Ramallah.

I proposed to Arafat an alternative road to a ceasefire: instead of an
official delegation appointed by the government of Israel that addresses
the Palestinian people on behalf of the government, I proposed to
organize an Israeli civil delegation, composed of Israeli citizens, each
of whom represents only himself. It is this delegation that would offer
the Palestinian people a ceasefire. I was delighted and appreciative
when Arafat agreed to the idea and committed the PA to the task of
achieving a ceasefire.

We invited a number of individuals and institutions to join us. We
appreciate the readiness of [former Foreign Minister] Professor Shlomo
Ben Ami to join the team leading the initiative, together with
[industrialist] Beni Gaon. We also turned to the Parents Circle--the
Family Forum [bereaved Israeli and Palestinian families supporting
reconciliation and peace], who accepted our invitation and
enthusiastically joined the ceasefire initiative.

A coordination meeting between our team and representatives of the PA
was held in Jerusalem on August 7, 2002, to advance the ceasefire
project. The Palestinian participants were Yasir Abd Rabo, Nabil Kassis,
Hassan Asfour, Samih al-Abid, Samir Rantisi and Ziad Abu Zayyad. The
Israelis were Shlomo Ben Ami, Beni Gaon, Abd al-Wahab Darawshe, Haim
Assa, Alberto Spektorowski, Parents Circle representatives Yitzhak
Frankental, Roni Hirshenson and Booma Shavit, and myself.

We agreed to promote a concept slightly different from the initial idea
that I presented to Arafat. We will organize a large convocation in
Jerusalem to declare a ceasefire and an end to hostile acts, to be held
in mid-September. (We also agreed to use the term "ceasefire and
cessation of all hostile acts" instead of "hudna".) We will invite 250
Palestinian representatives and 250 Israeli representatives. The
Palestinian group will comprise many of the 88 members of the
Palestinian parliament, as well as most of the Palestinian leadership.
We also agreed to a joint effort to invite international personalities
to the Jerusalem meeting, to provide sponsorship and thereby to enhance
the chances for success.

We are working shoulder to shoulder with our Palestinian partners to
finally bring about calm in our region.

