Q: What was your reaction to Palestinian Prime Minister
Ahmed Qurei's (Abu Ala's) statement about a one state solution?

A: I think that any statement that comes from the Palestinian
Authority on the question of binationalism has to be seen within the
context of Palestinian weakness vis-a-vis Israel. In other words, I do
not think that this was a statement about what Abu Ala or anybody else
in the Palestinian Authority believes to be the ideal solution. Seeing
the facts on the ground, you would have to be blind or stupid--knowing
that this barrier wall is going up and land is being stolen from the
Palestinians every day--to go on believing that the Palestinian state is
a possibility. It is partly a bald statement about the facts.

But it is also possibly a scare tactic for the Israeli government,
saying, "We know that the last thing you want is for us Palestinians to
live with you in one state, therefore if you don't want that to happen,
get your act together and give us viable territory."

While I understand this position and am sympathetic to it because we are
witnessing the most appalling situation in Palestinian history since
1948--it has never been so bad as this--obviously, I come from a
position that is quite different. I have a belief that there should be
only one state in this part of the world, there should be no partition
of Palestine, and I cannot approve of the implied acceptance of Israeli
racism [in Abu Ala's statement], if that is what he is saying.

Q: Can you talk more about your position?

A: I do not hold this position because I thought it up over the
last year, or because I have despaired of the two state solution. If we
want a peaceful settlement to this terrible conflict to be a realistic
long-term solution, I believe there is only one solution, and that is
one state in Israel and the occupied territories. There would be one
state, a state of its citizens, which means that the people who live
there will be the Israeli Jews who live there today, plus a population
of Palestinians, partly who are now currently under Israeli occupation,
but partly those who were displaced in 1948 and their descendents. This
state will be called "Israel/Palestine" or whatever they want. Said
Hamami, the [Palestine Liberation Organization] representative in London
who was tragically assassinated, used to say that they can call it a
cucumber, if that is what they want.

Q: So what you are talking about is a process of
decolonization.

A: This is a very long process and a difficult one for Israel.
First there must be an end to the occupation and a process of
decolonization of the territories where the most recent settlements have
been put up.

But it is more than that. The whole question of Zionism has to be
confronted. The ideology that says that there must be a piece of
territory that is exclusively the preserve of this one group called
"Jews" is utterly pernicious in my view. It is an ideology that has
caused enormous suffering for Palestinians. A state that sets itself up
with the ideology that "we are going to create a place for ourselves no
matter if it is currently inhabited, and no matter what happens to those
natives;" and then to actually get rid of the natives in order to make
that state; and then in order to keep it ethnically pure (which is a
ridiculous notion, not only in the 21st century but also for Israel
where 20 percent of the population is non-Jewish) to make sure that none
of the original inhabitants ever comes back; and then to stuff [the
state] as full as possible with Jews, no matter how phony these Jews are
(they could be a convenient lost tribe from Ethiopia or Russians of
which 40 percent are actually not Jewish)--this idea that created the
state of Israel is utterly pernicious. It is dangerous, it is malicious,
it is antidemocratic and it is racist.

It has not only damaged Palestinians, but many Jews who now have this
notion that they have a right to this territory, and that this territory
is solely their own. American Jews and British Jews, even though they
have no intention of living there themselves, want other Jews to live
there and do what has to be done in order to keep this situation going.

But I just want to be clear on one point. The moment one talks about
Zionism and the fact that it has to go and that the Jewish state has to
go, there is a reflex reaction of terror, panic, hatred and accusations
of anti-Semitism, plus the old canard that "they will throw us all into
the sea." Nobody is throwing anybody into the sea, I hope. And nobody is
going to massacre anybody, I hope.

Q: Why do you think that advocates of one state
solution are a minority in Palestinian politics?

A: The idea was first proposed in 1969 by the PLO and it didn't
get much further because it was instantly rejected by Israel. Also, the
power imbalance was very clear. The Palestinians could see that they
were a bunch of refugees up against a highly armed nuclear state. The
idea was seen as unrealistic and the PLO dropped it and started to talk
about the two state solution.

If you add to that the fact that the two state solution applies mostly
to those Palestinians under occupation, one can understand why their
first reaction is to get Israelis out of [the occupied territories].
Which is why I say that one might even have an arrangement where the
occupied areas are "de-occupied" and acquire an interim status, but
always with the idea that in the end everybody will be living together.
You need a leadership that proposes this idea, you need discussion of
this idea and you need to sell it.

