Israel's elections are in many ways a significant indicator of the
health of Jewish-Arab relations within the country.

One of the reactions of Palestinian citizens of Israel to the tragic
events of October 2000, when 12 of their number and a West Bank
Palestinian were killed in the course of mass violent demonstrations in
Israel, was to boycott the prime ministerial elections of February 2001.
This was a setback to the cause of Jewish-Arab relations.

Earlier this month the Israel Supreme Court ruled that Ahmed Tibi, Azmi
Bishara and Bishara's party, Balad, could run in the current elections.
In effect, the Court stated that the State of Israel can and should
tolerate participation in its elections even by those who appear to
challenge its basic, constitutional nature as a Jewish and democratic
state. On balance this was a victory for Arab-Jewish relations, insofar
as the alternative--banning the candidacy of Tibi and Bishara--was
likely to have serious negative consequences. At the same time, any
significant electoral achievement for Balad could be considered a
setback for Jewish-Arab relations from the Israeli Jewish standpoint.

The challenge of the current elections is twofold. First, will a
significant percentage of Palestinian Israelis again boycott the
elections, possibly opting instead to support the provocative creation
of alternative parallel Israeli Arab institutions such as an autonomous
Arab parliament? And secondly, assuming they do vote, will Palestinian
citizens of Israel elect radicals like Bishara who blatantly, and
articulately, argue that only if Israel becomes a "state of all its
citizens" can its Palestinian population enjoy genuine equality?

In the eyes of most Israeli Jews, including this writer, if either or
both of these gestures of protest take place to a significant extent,
this will reflect the fact that growing numbers of Palestinian Israelis
identify with those aspects of Palestine Liberation Organization policy
regarding the peace process that are incompatible with Israel's
constitutional nature as a Jewish democratic state, and are not prepared
to continue trying to function as a minority within the Jewish state.
This would be a grave development, with strategic consequences. It will
take a miracle to forestall it this time around, but even if indeed the
Israeli Arab electorate continues to vote according to more
"traditional" patterns, Israeli Jews must heed the growing signals of
alarm that these elections represent.

Undoubtedly, establishment Israel bears a great deal of blame for this
situation. Not only has it neglected the material needs of its Arab
citizens for decades in a criminally discriminate manner. It also
blindly ignored the effect upon them of the advent a decade ago of a
political process designed to create a Palestinian state just across the
Green Line--as if Israeli Arabs could be effectively quarantined and
isolated forever from the winds of Palestinian nationalism. And its
failure to launch a public process for defining the role of Arab
citizens in Israel is paralleled only by its failure to properly define
the Jewish content and context of the term "Jewish democratic."

But the Israeli Arab community is also to blame. It is badly split along
ideological, religious and clan lines. Most of its members of Knesset
are mediocre (not that the average level of Jewish MKs is anything to
brag about), and engage in little or no serious legislative work to
better the lot of their constituency. In short, it has consistently
failed to take advantage of the voice granted it within the Israeli
democratic system.

Because the demands of some Palestinian Israelis are increasingly
identified by Jews as not merely critical of, but antithetical to
Zionism and to the original intention of the international community
(United Nations General Assembly Resolution 181 of 1947) to create both
an Arab and a Jewish state in Palestine, intolerance toward them is
growing in Israel. Yet the candidacy of Labor Party leader Amram Mitzna,
a successful mayor of a mixed city, also reflects a pragmatic readiness
on the part of large sectors of the Israeli establishment to engage
Palestinian Israelis in political dialogue and integrate them directly
into government. There is even a growing tolerance in some Jewish
circles for certain aspects of the radical Arab agenda, such as cultural
autonomy for Palestinians in Israel.

Undoubtedly, much still depends on Israeli Jewish attitudes. But if we
are to move ahead it will be necessary for the Israeli Arab community to
acquiesce in minority status in a Jewish state, and proceed from there
to demand a fair definition of that status, alongside genuinely equal
treatment.

That is not happening. Hence the Arab aspect of these elections does not
appear likely to move relations in a positive direction.

