In the short term, nothing has changed in Israel's approach to the
Palestinian issue. And the short term is where nearly all politicians
live nearly all of the time.

Last week the Likud Central Committee voted for former prime minister
Binyamin Netanyahu's proposal negating a Palestinian state solution,
while the Labor Central Committee debated between party leader Fuad Ben
Eliezer's liberal Clinton Plan solution and challenger Haim Ramon's
demand for immediate unilateral redeployment. Neither party's actions
changed the way Prime Minister Ariel Sharon maneuvers vis-a-vis the main
players: the Palestinians, the moderate Arabs and the United States.

Labor is still in the government, and Sharon gets high marks from the US
administration and the Israeli public-at-large for his principled stand
in favor of a Palestinian state solution. Everyone knows that the state
Sharon is offering (more or less the territorial status quo) is a
non-starter for the main players. But the issue in any case is not on
the short-term agenda.

On the other hand, the longer-term ramifications could be significant.

First of all, all four more-or-less declared candidates--Sharon,
Netanyahu, Ben Eliezer and Ramon--indicated last week that they did not
envision negotiating with Arafat. Netanyahu favors a unilateral
solution--conquering and dismantling the Palestinian Authority. So does
Ramon: withdrawing unilaterally. Sharon for his part dismisses Arafat's
leadership, and Ben Eliezer relegates the Palestinian leader to the dust
bin of history. This is ostensibly a victory for Sharon's approach of
marginalizing Arafat. But it also castes in doubt any negotiated
solution in the near future, insofar as Arafat appears to remain firmly
in power.

Secondly, the two leading Labor figures are now clearly on record
favoring solutions that differ radically from Likud positions. While Ben
Eliezer does not appear disposed to lead Labor out of the coalition
tomorrow, he is nevertheless staking out his future platform as
opposition leader. In this regard, last week we witnessed the beginning
of the countdown toward the dissolution of the unity government and new
elections.

Thirdly, by pandering to an extremist and anachronistic position
negating a Palestinian state solution, Netanyahu painted himself into a
corner and actually lost ground politically--witness the polling results
that show that even 61 percent of Likud voters back Sharon's position,
while the nation at large firmly mistrusts Netanyahu. This strengthens
Sharon's chances to be the Likud candidate for prime minister in the
next elections, and even permits him to adopt more moderate positions
regarding the Palestinian issue, in the unlikely case that he is
disposed to do so.

Finally, if Netanyahu's triumph was a pyrrhic victory at the Israeli
domestic political level, it nevertheless appeared to symbolize a
dangerous erosion of the two-state solution at the broad strategic
level. After all, Netanyahu was emboldened to push his anti-Palestinian
state solution in the aftermath of Israel's Operation Defensive Shield,
which during April 2002, under Sharon's direction, systematically
decimated the infrastructure of the Palestinian Authority because it had
become a terrorist entity. Sharon, who has long argued that "a
Palestinian state already exists" in the West Bank and Gaza, cannot
easily continue to maintain this thesis when Israel has taken over all
security functions in areas A and B.

Here, too, we encounter the growing school of Palestinian thought that
argues that it is increasingly useless for Palestinians to campaign for
a state, because Israel is exploiting the interim period to build more
settlements and control more and more of the land, the economy and the
movement of peoples in Palestine. Since Israel won't withdraw, argues
this camp, Palestinians should abandon their quest for a state and
instead hunker down to win the demographic war in the long term. Within
eight years there will be an Arab (Palestinians + Israeli Arabs)
majority between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea. Within a
generation or two, as Israeli settlements spread and entrench themselves
while the Arab majority grows, Israel will confront a hopeless South
African situation. Separation through a two-state solution will become
politically and physically impossible. Ultimately, under international
pressure, the Palestinian majority will take control of a binational state.

According to this logic, Netanyahu's campaign against a Palestinian
state plays right into the hands of those Palestinians who in any case
despair of attaining a genuine two state solution. It gives pause to
consider why Yasir Arafat no longer sets deadlines for declaring a
Palestinian state unilaterally. And why his conditions for a two-state
solution are so obviously designed to "Palestinize" Israel over the long
run through the return of hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees.

Israelis, including members of the Likud Central Committee who treasure
a Jewish, democratic Zionist state, would do well to look carefully at
Haim Ramon's proposal for unilateral withdrawal. If negotiations with
Arafat are either impossible or non-productive, then
unilaterally-imposed separation--which is in effect a two-state solution
by default--may offer the only means for Israel to ensure its
demographic and democratic survival.

