Palestinians and Israelis have long disputed the applicability of the
Fourth Geneva Convention to the Palestinian occupied territories. Their
differences on the matter go to the heart of the conflict. Palestinians
base their claim that the Fourth Geneva Convention must apply to the
territories on the fact that these are under a belligerent military
occupation. Thus, those provisions of international law that deal with
people under occupation should be applied.

The Israelis, on the other hand, have always refused the applicability
of the Geneva Convention and many other aspects of international law
because, in the final analysis, Israel has no intention of putting
itself in a position of having to end the occupation: an Israeli
acceptance of the applicability of the convention will lead not only to
better treatment of the people under occupation, but would also embody
an Israeli recognition of the occupied status of the territories and
consequently the ultimate necessity of ending this occupation. This is
the core of the conflict.

Israeli violations of humanitarian law concerning people under
occupation go beyond the day-to-day harassments and collective
punishments of Palestinians and the brutal Israeli measures including
the killings, the confiscation of land, the destruction of
infrastructure and the restriction of movement. There is another
little-commented-upon motivating factor which plays a large role in the
Israeli insistence to continue its occupation and consequently to deny
the applicability of international law. One analyst suggested some time
ago that the Israeli occupation might be the second most profitable
project in the Middle East after oil. While this may sound somewhat
exaggerated, there can be no doubt that the illegal economic benefits
Israel reaps by exploiting the occupied territories are substantial.

First of all, Israel has illegally been taking most of the water
resources that legally belong to the occupied Palestinian people, for
the use either of Israelis in Israel or Israeli settlers in the
territories. Israel has also been handsomely rewarded with tourism
revenue from the many attractive religious and non-religious sites in
east Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Jericho. A third economic boon of the
occupation for Israel is the exploitation of Palestinian workers as
cheap labor without the benefits that otherwise should have been
extended. If we calculate all these different kinds of illegal economic
benefits, another reason for the Israeli insistence on refusing to
adhere to different components of international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention, becomes apparent.

Yet, despite the continuous Israeli refusal to implement the Fourth
Geneva Convention and accept its de jure applicability, the Palestinian
people and the international community have continued to insist on the
applicability of the convention. They have insisted on the applicability
of articles related to the treatment of prisoners, to the transfer of
citizens of the occupying country to the occupied territories, or the
use of the natural resources of the occupied land by the occupying
power. The latest illustration of the isolation of the Israeli legal
position in general was the recent finding of the International Court of
Justice which, among other things, specified that the Palestinian
territories under Israeli control, Gaza and the West Bank including East
Jerusalem, are under an illegal occupation and consequently the
occupying power has to adhere to international law in this regard.

It would be in the interest of Israel to show more respect for
international law, including the Geneva conventions. After all, the very
legitimacy of Israel is based on specific UN resolutions and other
stipulations of international law, and Israel might come to regret its
dismissive attitude toward international law upon which it may need to
depend again.

