The current Israeli-Palestinian conflict appears to touch on issues of
morality on at least two levels.

The primary dimension concerns the morality of targeting civilians. The
arguments are familiar. Israel, its supporters, and many in the
West--particularly the United States--contend that there is a
substantive and moral difference between its insistence on deliberately
targeting only terrorists and its efforts to avoid injury to Palestinian
civilians, on the one hand, and the readiness of Palestinian terrorist
organizations to target Israeli civilians, on the other. In reply,
Palestinian terrorists frequently argue that, in effect, all Israelis
are past, current or future soldiers; or they claim that, as the weaker
side militarily, they have no alternative.

By and large, I believe that the distinction between Israeli and
Palestinian attitudes toward targeting civilians places us on the
cutting edge--regarding moral values--of a war of civilizations. This
argument characterizes not only Israel's war, but that of the United
States as well, in confronting Islamic radical suicide terrorists who
deliberately target American and other civilians. But it has to be
tempered with due consideration for topical and tactical factors. Beyond
everything else, here in Israel/Palestine we all know that eventually we
are going to have to find a way to live with one another as neighbors,
no matter what the moral legacy of war in the eyes of each side.

This brings us to a second dimension of ethics and morality: what is and
is not permissible in the public debate and in non-governmental
activities concerning the war. In Israel we have two striking recent
examples.

First, several weeks ago 27 Israel Air Force pilots, most of them not
even in active reserve duty, published a statement alleging that the IAF
was in fact not maintaining its own standards for avoiding civilian
casualties. The IAF, the pilots alleged, had in effect crossed the line
and was knowingly and willfully endangering civilians in its efforts to
target terrorists in crowded urban areas, primarily in the Gaza Strip.
Most of the Israeli public, and nearly the entire security
establishment, rejected the protest, and argued that such a blanket and
public refusal to obey orders was a violation of the military code; many
also deemed it an unethical politicization of the military (the pilot
protesters also argued against the occupation) and an unhealthy
precedent for soldiers with right wing sympathies who might in future
disobey orders to dismantle settlements. But because IAF pilots are held
up as an elite corps, it was clear even to many angry critics that this
group of "refusalists" could not easily be ignored: they were sending a
message to the public about the country's morals that at least had to be
given due thought and consideration, and that might be more important
than the protesters' decision to ignore the legal niceties.

The second Israeli example is the so-called "Geneva agreement"
                   to end (at a virtual level) the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict, that was reached last week by Yossi Beilin, Yasser Abed Rabbo
and their supporters and colleagues. Leaving aside for the moment an
analysis of the agreement's contents (which can only be undertaken
seriously once they are released to the public), many of its detractors
in Israel argue that it was somehow immoral, unethical, or even illegal
for a group of Israeli citizens who oppose their government's policies
to draw up a "virtual" peace agreement with the Palestinian enemy. It is
also alleged that it was improper for foreign governments, led by the
Swiss, to engage in financing and sponsoring such an endeavor.

It is relatively easy to refute the protests regarding the legality or
morality of Beilin's action: Beilin is a politician, and all's fair in
(Israeli) politics. Likud politicians, when out of power, hold secret
meetings with our Arab neighbors in an effort to influence election
results, and brazenly lobby in Washington against Labor government
policies. Beilin, who has registered a number of unofficial agreements
with senior Palestinian leaders over the years, some when Labor was
actually heading the government, would also presumably argue that his is
the only effective way to move the process forward, and that the goal of
Israeli-Palestinian peace justifies his tactics. Besides, Beilin made
little effort over the past two years to hide what he and Abed Rabbo
were trying to do; the protests emerged only when he succeeded in
delivering an agreement.

This brings us, in conclusion, full circle to the issue of moral
differences between Israeli and Palestinian society. Beilin (or Ami
Ayalon, coauthor of another, shorter, formula for peace) never asked
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon for permission. But his Palestinian
counterparts to agreements over the years were in all cases emissaries
of leader Yasir Arafat. Indeed, in some 15 years of track II diplomacy
with Palestinian counterparts, I have rarely met one who did not
acknowledge that, one way or another, Arafat or his senior lieutenants
were in the picture and sanctioned the meetings.

One can, of course, argue about Arafat's motives in directly or
indirectly controlling these contacts: advancing peace, fragmenting the
Israeli polity, "knowing" the enemy, maintaining his dictatorial
grip--or perhaps all of the above. But the pilots' protest and the
Geneva agreement are first and foremost hallmarks of Israel's open and
vibrant civil society. Prime Minister Sharon, who values public
consensus regarding his policies, has no alternative but to take notice.

It is hard to find parallels in Palestine, where the "moral" argument
usually consists of the blanket determination that Israel is morally in
the wrong and Palestine in the right.

