Q: What is your immediate reaction to talk in Israeli
circles about formally applying the Fourth Geneva Convention to the
occupied territories?

A: My immediate reaction is that Israel has been in violation of
the Geneva Conventions since 1967, but that Israel is currently under
international pressure, largely because of the case [on the wall] that
was brought before the International Court of Justice (ICJ), to try and
bring its actions a little more into compliance with international law.
I think Israel is afraid of being in the position of a pariah state,
like South Africa was.

Q: Is this largely a legal or diplomatic move?

There are two issues here. There is the political and public relations
dimension and there is the legal dimension. The legal dimension is a
little problematic, because the ICJ does not have any mechanism to
implement its decisions. It is only a question of public relations and
how a country is viewed among other nations. The power to impose
sanctions for violations of international law is vested with the UN
Security Council under Chapter 7, and Israel is assured of a US veto
whenever such a threat arises.

However, in the case of South Africa where sanctions were initially not
applied because of the US and British veto, there was a groundswell of
grassroots actions such as boycotts, withdrawal of investments as well
as a public relations campaign which in the end succeeded in bringing an
end to apartheid and the regime of racism in South Africa.

Israel does not wish to be in this position, and therefore it has
undertaken an aggressive public relations campaign to attempt to appear
to be at least in some compliance with international law in order to
avoid such a groundswell of popular sentiment against it as a violator
of international law.

Q: If Israel was to officially accept that the Geneva
Conventions applied to the occupied territories wouldn't that undermine
its case vis-a-vis the status of those territories?

A: Of course it would. There are consequences to such acceptance.
I think they will try to pretend to accept the Geneva Convention by
giving their own interpretation of it that takes the spirit out of it.
For example, for a long time they've said that while they don't accept
the de jure applicability of the convention they voluntarily comply with
the "humanitarian provisions" of the convention without of course saying
what these are. So to the uninformed they appear to be in compliance and
the issue of non-compliance becomes a political rather than a legal
issue. Then they can say, as they often do, that the United Nations is
always against them, there is an automatic majority, and therefore they
don't have to listen to the UN.

Now they are faced with the ICJ, which is not a political but a judicial
body. So they are feeling pressure to take some action or say some words
and improve the appearance of compliance. Of course, Israel has not said
it will accept the convention, it has also not said it will take
specific action based on such acceptance. There was only a suggestion to
study the idea of complying with the convention. I think once they look
at the practical consequences of such a step, they will realize that it
requires a radical change in their policies on many levels, including of
course the whole issue of the legality of the settlements, the changes
on the ground that they have and continue to carry out, the refusal to
abolish collective punishment which is totally prohibited under the
Geneva Conventions, the restrictions on the level of changes they can
make to the legal structure in the occupied territories. There are just
too many issues they would have to deal with if they were to seriously
accept the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention.

Q: So you think it's more of a public relations exercise
than anything serious?

A: I certainly suspect so.

