The issue of the Palestinian population in Israel is a very thorny one
in many different respects, and its sensitivity is magnified during the
time of elections. There is often a focus on the way that the Arab
minority will vote as an indicator of many things, among them the
ability of successive Israeli governments to integrate this minority
into Israeli society and the political system. The "challenge" facing
Israelis in this regard is the inherent contradiction between
integration of 1948 Palestinians into Israel and maintaining what some
call "Jewish purity," and others call "the Jewish character" of the state.

In this particular Israeli election, the problem is further magnified
because of the tension that has arisen between the Israeli government
and its legal system, on one hand, and some Israeli Arabs, on the other.
Israeli officials have challenged the very legality of Palestinian
Israeli candidacy. While that legal problem was solved when the High
Court permitted the candidates to participate, the discussion itself
highlighted the strategic problem of that minority's lack of integration
into the fabric of the society and its political system. That problem is
also illustrated in other ways: through the level of voting for non-Arab
parties by Palestinians in Israel, including parties with a long history
of Israeli-Palestinian partnership within Israel, and through heightened
Islamic tendencies that in some ways rebuff attempts at integration.

The Palestinian citizens of Israel have only become more closely engaged
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and there is no doubt that the
deepening of the crisis in Israel in recent years mirrors at least in
part the deterioration of Israeli-Palestinian relations and the problems
facing the peace process.

As the particular issues of the Palestinian minority in Israel have
become more aggravated, their role in the Israeli political system seems
to be following a converse downturn. It appears that Palestinians in
Israel are losing their legitimacy in the eyes of the Jewish majority as
a genuine part of the Israeli population and political system. Even the
left-wing parties cannot add in Arab parliament seats as they hobble
together the majority seats needed to form a government coalition; the
Israeli public does not consider the inclusion of Arab candidates
legitimate.

Another lens through which the Jewish majority sees this issue is that
of demographics. Given the Arab minority's lack of integration, they are
perceived as a demographic problem or threat. This is connected with the
general Palestinian-Israeli conflict because with the lack of progress
towards a two-state solution, the 1948 borders and the territories
occupied by Israel add up to one growing demographic nightmare for
Israelis wishing to remain the leading group.

Thus, it is only in an atmosphere of peace and reconciliation,
especially of the kind that allows for ending the occupation and
establishing an independent and sovereign Palestinian state along the
1967 borders and in peace beside the state of Israel, that can create a
situation conducive to reversing the deterioration of Jewish-Palestinian
relations inside Israel. Of course, this must be accompanied by the
necessary democratic relations between the majority and minority,
whereby the citizenship of each individual is no different than the
citizenship of others.

