Israeli settlement expansion is the essence of the ongoing bloody
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, not least because the conflict was born
when Jewish immigrants in the first half of this century took over
Palestinian land by force, well-documented massacres and other such
means. Israel later occupied the West Bank and Gaza Strip in 1967 and
has since used settlement expansion as a way to consolidate that
occupation and convert it into a solid and irreversible reality.

Over the years of the peace process with Israel, most Palestinians lost
confidence in that process precisely because it did not stop the Israeli
policy of confiscating Palestinian land for settlement building.
Palestinians see settlement expansion as a way of making conflict, while
the peace process is supposed to be about ending the conflict.
Palestinians fail to understand how these two things can go hand in
hand. Israel, on the other hand, continues the contradiction.

The main obstacle to the reaching of an interim agreement in bilateral
Washington talks in 1991 and 1992 was the fact that the Palestinian
delegation insisted that any agreement should include an Israeli
commitment to stopping all land confiscations and settlement growth. It
was only because the Palestinian leadership conducting secret talks in
Oslo did not insist on that requirement, that the Oslo negotiations
succeeded. Avoiding the settlement issue, as it turned out, was like
leaving a land mine on the road to peace.

The Israeli policy of settlement expansion also affects other components
of the conflict. First, a major part of the Jerusalem problem is tied up
with settlements. That was clear in Israel's proposed solution for East
Jerusalem at Camp David last year. Israel suggested that the areas it
had already taken over with settlements should become part of sovereign
Israel--and the rest of the land be allotted to the Palestinian side.
Settlements have to do with the allotment of water in a final agreement,
because Israel confiscates land and builds settlements on major
Palestinian aquifers. Finally, the building of settlements is entangled
with strategic interests and security. For example, Israel has erected a
line of Jewish settlements along the Jordanian border that prevents
Palestinian control over those borders. The settlements that exist today
effectively cut the West Bank into several divided cantons.

The Palestinians cannot by any means accept the Israeli acquisition of
Palestinian territories through the settlement presence. Not only is
this a flat contradiction and violation of international law and many
United Nations General Assembly and Security Council resolutions, but
also, if the final agreement encompasses and adapts to the presence of
the settlements, what remains will never make a viable and contiguous
Palestinian state. Based on historic experience with Israel, if
Palestinians accept these illegal facts on the ground that were created
by virtue of Israeli force, the Israeli appetite for further facts on
the ground will increase. This is precisely what happened during the
eight years after Oslo, in which the number of Jewish settlers in the
territories doubled. It did not matter to Israel that the two sides were
negotiating the very fate of those territories, and Palestinians have
concluded that Israeli actions on this issue were simply in bad faith.

From a Palestinian point of view, the decisive factor on whether a final
and comprehensive peaceful settlement can be reached between Israel and
Palestine is based on whether Israel is willing to end its occupation in
all its forms--military, economic and colonization through the
settlements. As such, the basis for the solution can only be
international law and Security Council Resolution 242, which reject the
acquisition of land by force. If the solution is not based on these
internationally accepted criteria, then the peace process so far has
taught us that the solution will be based on the imbalance of power,
i.e. Israeli will. The results would be equal to political suicide for
the Palestinian national cause and produce a solution that Palestinians
will never accept.

