In 1994 I published a research proposal regarding final status
arrangements for the settlements, which became known as the Alpher Plan.
I suggested a map that enabled Israel to incorporate around two-thirds
of the settlers into its final status borders, while annexing some 11
percent of the West Bank and Gaza. The Palestinian state would be
compensated with land, a Gaza-West Bank corridor arrangement and
concessions in other areas of concern. The remaining one-third of the
settlers, most in relatively small settlements in the Samarian and
Judean mountain heartland and in the Jordan Valley and the Gaza Strip,
would be evacuated. Arrangements would be made to accommodate those few
who might choose to live in a Palestinian state.

In the ensuing years, that map went through a number of permutations,
resurfacing in altered form first as the Beilin-Abu Maazen Plan, then as
the basis for Israeli-PLO negotiations at Camp David II in July 2000 and
at Taba half a year later. By the time negotiations had exhausted
themselves and violence took hold, the gap separating the two sides'
alternative maps had been narrowed to around one percent of the
territory. Reliable polls indicated that the Israeli public would
support a negotiated outcome along these parameters.

Meanwhile a succession of Israeli governments, from Rabin's through
Sharon's, continued to build and expand the settlements. This was a
violation of the spirit, if not the letter, of the Oslo agreements. It
was also--at least for those Israeli governments dedicated to advancing
the peace process--an incredibly mindless act that placed short-term
political expediency ahead of the welfare of the peace process. The
signal it sent to the Palestinian people was translated directly into
the violence that broke out 16 months ago. It was no coincidence that
the Mitchell Commission report placed such a high priority on freezing
settlement construction as a confidence-building measure.

Months of violence have hardened Israeli attitudes on some issues, such
as even a symbolic refugee "return." But they actually appear to have
instilled a greater willingness within the Israeli public to part with
the most provocative settlements. The public is not happy to devote
Israeli defense resources, including army reserve service, to protecting
extremist settlers. It increasingly recognizes that maintaining the more
isolated settlements will eventually bring about a demographic disaster
for Israel. And it has come to terms with the need for, and
inevitability of, a viable Palestinian state.

Today around half the public is prepared to consider unilateral
withdrawal and the dismantling of the "heartland" and Gaza settlements
even without an agreement. But this new attitude has not found
expression in the platform of a single party in the Knesset; even on the
Left, political leaders continue to hold out the hope of a negotiated
settlement, and to fear the possible negative consequences of a
unilateral act of withdrawal.

As for the settlers themselves, the vast majority are understandably
confident of their future. These are the non-ideological settlers who
live in the bedroom suburb blocs abutting the Green Line, whose eventual
annexation to Israel even the PLO tacitly accepted in negotiations. In a
few isolated secular settlements in the mountain heartland there have
been cases of settlers leaving under pressure of the Intifada; no doubt
there would be more if the government were to offer financial
compensation now. But the ideologically motivated settlers in Shiloh,
Elon Moreh, Hebron and elsewhere in the mountain heartland and the Gaza
Strip have, with great dedication and considerable political skill,
ensured for themselves an extraordinary degree of influence over the
Israeli internal debate that far exceeds their numbers. They remain
absolutely determined to impose their messianic vision on their fellow
Israelis--and on the Palestinian people.

That vision, if realized, bespeaks a disastrous outcome for both
peoples. If the ideological settler minority has its way, Israel will
face a choice between becoming a full-fledged apartheid state, with the
Palestinian cities (area A) filling the role of bantustans, and becoming
a binational state. The first alternative spells the end of Israeli
democracy; the second, the end of Israel as a Jewish, Zionist state. The
ideological settlers would procure for Israel a place of honor in the
March of Folly.

In recent years prime ministers Rabin, Peres and Barak all
struggled--despite, and alongside their mistakes--to reach political
accommodation with the PLO in order to avert precisely such an outcome.
Rabin paid with his life, Barak with his political reputation; only the
indefatigable Peres persists. None reached the point where they were
actually called upon, as national leaders, to implement a final status
agreement and remove settlers and settlements.

When this does happen, it will be a major moment of truth for Israeli
democracy. Dismantling settlements will require an extraordinary level
of leadership, capable of galvanizing a solid majority in the Knesset.
And for that to happen, there will have to be a substantial improvement
in the quality of Israeli political life.

Yossi Alpher is Director of the Political Security Domain, and former
Director of the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies, Tel Aviv
University.

