The West Bank separation fence works. It keeps out terrorists, and for
that matter illegal Palestinian immigrants and car thieves too. It has
made a major contribution to a radical reduction in Palestinian suicide
bombings over recent months. It stands to reason that it must encompass
the Jerusalem area as well.

The Israeli authorities, faced with the need to delineate a path for the
fence in Jerusalem, have adhered mainly to the expanded municipal
boundaries created by Israel in 1967. That decision is causing hardship
to tens of thousands of Palestinian Jerusalemites and their immediate
neighbors in the surrounding West Bank. The ugliest manifestation is the
eight meter high wall in Abu Dis. So problematic are large sections of
the Jerusalem area fence/wall that dozens of High Court appeals have
frozen its progress. Even the Ministry of Defense planners of the fence
realize they have a fiasco on their hands.

In order to find a better way to build the fence, we need to recall how
we got ourselves into this mess in the first place. When the dust
settled from the 1967 Six-Day War, Israeli intelligence assessed that we
would shortly be subjected to heavy American and Soviet pressures to
withdraw from all the territories we had just occupied. This assumption
was based on the precedent of two previous wars, in 1948-49 and 1956,
when we were obliged by great power demands to withdraw from portions of
southern Lebanon and the Sinai Peninsula.

A hasty deliberation in June 1967 by the Israeli unity government of the
day determined that we could preempt the anticipated pressures by
"creating facts" that would make it difficult to force us to withdraw
from at least one occupied area: East Jerusalem with its Jewish holy and
historic sites. A committee was established to define the borders of the
East Jerusalem area destined for annexation. Here began a process that
seemed logical at the time, but can only be described in retrospect as
an act of folly.

Based on the assumption that peace with our neighbors was unlikely, that
nearly all the territories would soon be returned, and that beyond the
bounds of Jerusalem we would once again confront the Jordanian Arab
Legion, the decision was taken to expand the borders of East Jerusalem
to render them defensible by encompassing the hilltops to the east,
north and south of the city from which Jordanian troops had shot at
Israelis during the years between 1948 and 1967. That pushed the new
border to places like the village of Sur Baher to the east. Further,
yielding to the assessment of then-Mayor Teddy Kollek that Jerusalem
could once again come under siege as in 1948 and would need to be
resupplied more efficiently, a finger of municipal territory was drawn
to the north, almost to al Bireh, to encompass the landing strip at
Qalandia.

Consequently, instead of annexing a few thousand Palestinian Arab
residents in the Old City and Mount of Olives and Mount Scopus
areas--the places that interested Israel from an historic and religious
standpoint--we annexed some 70,000 Palestinians in 1967. Most of the
annexed Palestinians lived in areas that interact on a daily basis with
the surrounding West Bank, for which East Jerusalem remains the
commercial, educational, medical, religious, and cultural center. These
have now become more than 200,000 residents, interacting with an even
larger number in the nearby Ramallah and Bethlehem areas. To ensure the
impossibility of returning to the old lines, we have built extensive
Jewish neighborhoods in the annexed parts of the city, thereby creating
a virtually inseparable ethnic/religious mosaic.

Needless to say, none of the pessimistic assessments that underpinned
Israel's Jerusalem annexation scheme ever came to pass. The United
States and Soviet Union never pressed for withdrawal; the vicissitudes
of Israel-Arab and Arab-Arab interactions led the Jordanians to abdicate
any intention of returning to the West Bank; and all parties accept that
an eventual Palestinian state will be demilitarized, hence unable to
mount a military threat to Israeli Jerusalem.

Back in 1967, in the euphoria of an historic military victory and the
absence of a convincing Palestinian national movement, most Israelis
were blind to the demographic and political ramifications of the
Jerusalem expansion scheme. We no longer have that excuse. Successive
Israeli governments and Jerusalem municipalities have failed to provide
a coherent political solution for more than 200,000 Arab residents of
the city whom Israel doesn't want but won't let go of. The fence/wall in
Jerusalem as currently planned will create legions of newly embittered
Palestinian Jerusalemites, including potential terrorists, some within
and some beyond the barrier, and will unfairly disrupt the lives of
hundreds of thousands more.

The fence is increasingly seen as defining a political as well as a
security border. In order to avoid a situation in which the Jerusalem
fence perpetuates a negative demographic dynamic and actually worsens
Israel's security situation, its path must be reconsidered. Even the
Israeli political right now increasingly acknowledges that the inclusion
of villages like Sur Baher within the Jerusalem municipal
boundaries--soon to be reaffirmed by the fence--is a mistake.

While in some parts of the north and south of the city the fence's
location makes sense, this is not the case to the east. Here a decision
must be taken, in some areas, to move the anti-terrorist barrier closer
to the border between the Jewish and Arab parts of Jerusalem, and in
other areas to rely on armed patrols rather than fences. While this is
not an optimal solution from a security, political, demographic, or
humanitarian standpoint, as a synthesis of these requirements it is
certainly better than the existing plan.

