The United States administration is clearly determined to strike Iraq,
and current diplomatic efforts to garner a new Security Council
resolution are merely part of a continued attempt to mobilize the widest
possible base of support. Washington has issued strong statements that
confirm the United States' readiness to act alone against Iraq, but
other voices in Washington warn of the consequences that could follow
hasty and unilateral moves. These voices are calling on the US
administration to exert every conceivable effort to form an alliance.

Many Arab countries with close relations to the United States are now
torn between American pressures demanding that they join the alliance
and their constituencies' opposition to the United States waging a war
on Iraq. These countries find the United Nations' resolution a way out
of this dilemma because it offers them an excuse not to openly oppose
the American strike, and even provides justification for participating
in the strike to an extent. The United States clearly wants to secure
this kind of official Arab position, as it would eliminate many of the
difficulties the US is now facing.

In order to overcome the obstacles of winning over the Arabs on Iraq,
America is now concerned with calming the situation in Palestine. A
continuation of Israeli escalations against the Palestinian people
during a strike on Iraq would provoke segments of the Arab masses while
jeopardizing Arab leaderships and complicating the position of the
United States. Therefore, the United States administration has recently
undertaken two preparatory steps.

The first step was to invite Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to
Washington and ask him to calm the situation by loosening the
stranglehold on Palestinians to an extent that does not compromise
Israeli security considerations. But due to the total harmony in the
strategic visions of US President George W. Bush and Sharon regarding
the Palestinian leadership, the US request is purely tactical and does
not extend to the Palestinian president.

The second step was to disclose the "road map" for ending the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict in line with Bush's three-year vision for
the establishment of a Palestinian state capable of existing alongside
Israel. In a move all too typical of times when the US needs something,
Undersecretary of State William Burns was sent to the region to throw
dust in the eyes of the Arabs. This is an attempt to show that the
Palestinian issue has not been forgotten and that constructive plans
will be set into motion at the first opportunity.

Sharon does not see eye to eye with Bush's vision for the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict because he is absolutely opposed to the
establishment of an independent Palestinian state west of the Jordan
River. According to Sharon's ideological vision, the area west of the
river is "the land of Israel" and must not be shared or split with any
other party. Bush's vision for the establishment of an independent
Palestinian state will therefore go nowhere with Sharon.

But this Israeli "bulldozer" learned a valuable lesson from former Prime
Minister Yitzhak Shamir's confrontation with Bush Sr. when they headed
their respective governments. Sharon doesn't want to repeat this costly
public confrontation. That does not mean, however, that Sharon will bow
to Bush Jr.'s vision. Instead, he will thwart its implementation through
indirect methods.

Sharon will promise President Bush to calm the situation on the
Palestinian front (because he wants the advantages of the Iraqi strike)
and will undertake superficial measures such as releasing portions of
the frozen Authority funds, removing some scattered and uninhabited
settlement caravans and redeploying the army from cities that have been
reoccupied.

In the coming period, however, he will also do all he can in a
circuitous manner to incite the Palestinians with the aim of provoking a
violent response--such as a series of suicide bombings within the Green
Line--that he can use as an excuse to irreparably terminate the
Palestinian national project. In short, he will try to exploit every
opportunity provided by the anticipated war on Iraq to preclude any
success of Bush's vision for ending the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

In doing this, however, Sharon will avoid an open and public
confrontation with the American administration. He is not able to
implicitly undertake what he and increasing numbers of Israelis want: a
mass transfer campaign to expel large numbers of Palestinians from the
country. If calming the situation in Palestine is a US prerogative
during its war on Iraq, a large-scale Israeli campaign to transfer
Palestinians would stymie this US goal, while lighting the fuse of the
entire Arab region and spurring disasters throughout the international
arena that have extremely serious ramifications.

It is worth noting, however, that the absence of the opportunity to
implement a mass transfer of Palestinians does not mean that Sharon will
not attempt to exploit the circumstances to implement internal transfer
of Palestinians. The goal of this would be to tighten the siege around
them in separated cantons. After all, the struggle between Palestinians
and Israelis is over gaining control of the largest area of Palestine
while decreasing the presence of the other.

The Palestinians do not have many choices in the upcoming months other
than to practice the highest degree of self-control possible,
particularly in terms of halting suicide bombings inside the Green Line
and strengthening their ability to stand fast until the storm passes.
These are not simple matters; on the contrary, they are extremely
difficult. The internal Palestinian situation continues to suffer from
numerous internal splintering, on the one hand, and from the weakening
of the Palestinian Authority on the other. This in turn opens the way
for internal disputes regarding suicide operations within the Green
Line. In order to strengthen the Palestinians' ability to withstand
Israeli aggression, there must be both material resources and public
trust in the Authority. Both of these essential ingredients are now
missing, and the situation is further exacerbated by the fact that
removing Arafat remains a strategic demand of Israel and the US.

Burns' visit will not result in any practical steps, and in the coming
months the Palestinian situation will be forgotten again, shifting in
its importance until the post-strike situation in Iraq becomes clear. No
significant political moves will be taken before next summer, by the
most conservative estimates. And when they happen, there isn't any
guarantee that those moves will be in the Palestinian favor.

