The ceasefire agreement that was agreed upon by all major Palestinian
factions several weeks ago is viewed by Palestinians as a miracle. Prior
to this watershed, it was difficult to imagine the possibility that
these groups with such differences of opinion on practical and strategic
matters might come to a consensus--never mind one that would hold.

True, this surprising consensus is driven by a wide range of objectives.
Each faction or leader has hopes of gaining in a particular way by
pursuing the ceasefire. Many are adhering to the ceasefire because it
will allow the Palestinian leadership to fulfill a major obligation of
the roadmap plan                                                 : to
"end armed activity against Israelis anywhere." Others are seeking to
pressure Israel towards reciprocity, which, according to the roadmap,
means "ending violence against Palestinians everywhere." But there are
still other Palestinians and Palestinian factions who are adhering to
the ceasefire because they feel that the majority of the Palestinian
public wants to give the ceasefire a chance. These factions want to
appeal to the Palestinian majority.

Needless to say, officials in the Palestinian Authority view the
ceasefire as a means of fulfilling Palestinians' obligations,
particularly pertaining to security, that are written into the roadmap.
At this moment, it is difficult for the Palestinian leadership to do
much more than ask Palestinian factions for a ceasefire, since there has
been very little reciprocity by Israel that would create an atmosphere
conducive to more advanced security intervention.

Later on, the Palestinian Authority is asked to take practical measures
against any person or group that violates any aspect of the roadmap and
its commitments. There is a reason that this was delayed, and that is to
allow the Palestinian Authority to rebuild its security apparatus
(which, according to experts here should take six months and requires
that Israeli troops withdraw to allow for the free passage of
Palestinian security officers). The additional time is also intended to
reap some political achievements for the Palestinian Authority which
would give the leadership political capital to invest in the second
phase, a period focused on maintaining law and order, re-establishing a
single authority and other aspects of public security.

What is needed now, in order for the ceasefire to stick, is a series of
developments that would spur the Palestinian public to gain interest in
the roadmap. In other words, the Palestinian Authority is arguing that
the previous violence did not bring Palestinians any closer to their
national objectives and that non-violence should enable them to become
more effective in ending the occupation. If Israel were to fulfill its
obligations encoded in the first phase of the roadmap (an end to
settlement expansion, the dismantling of checkpoints and roadblocks
inside the occupied territories, and the opening of closed Palestinian
institutions in Jerusalem) these developments should offer enough
momentum and reward that the Palestinian public will want to continue
upon this path.

If this does not happen, however, and if Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas is
not able to show his public that non-violence is more useful than
violence, and if Israel continues its ongoing campaign of arresting
activists, confiscating land and imposing upon us the apartheid wall,
which will encircle our communities and choke our economy, then the
course of events will lead right into the hands of those who argue: "no
matter what we do or do not do, this Israeli government has no intention
of replacing the current violent relationship with a peaceful one."

The Palestinian Authority has no means of pressuring Israel to
reciprocate with its obligations and is seeking an active American role
of the kind that would deliver Israel to the roadmap in the same manner
that the United States has succeeded in delivering the Palestinians to
their obligations. Otherwise, the current calm, which is truly a golden
opportunity for political progress, will be short-lived and end in
catastrophe.

