In addressing the future status of the settlements in
Israeli-Palestinian final status arrangements, we first have to ask
whether, considering the terrorist war being waged over the past 16
months, any agreements at all are possible. In view of the Israeli mood,
what are the chances of successful negotiations?

At Camp David II in July 2000, Prime Minister Ehud Barak was prepared to
give up 96 percent of the West Bank and Gaza. It is impossible to
withdraw in this way from nearly all of the territories without
dismantling settlements and removing their residents. At Taba in January
2001, Barak's government increased the offer to 98 percent, along with
part of the Halutza Dunes region inside Israel, with all the
ramifications this precedent carries for future Palestinian demands. Had
Arafat responded with a genuine readiness for peace, the Israeli public
would have been persuaded that this constituted the end of all violent
conflict with the rest of the Arab world as well. A majority would have
supported Barak, even at the cost of a severe internal rift and perhaps
domestic violence.

Arafat responded to Barak's unbelievable concessions by raising a new
and far-reaching demand: the right of return. Arafat knows this demand
is totally unacceptable to the vast majority of Israeli Jews--94
percent, according to one poll. It was here that he revealed his true
face, even to those who still believed him: it is not peace he wants,
but the destruction of the only Jewish state in the world. He proceeded
to follow up with the current campaign of terrorism and attrition. The
reaction of the Israeli public--a sense of betrayal by Arafat and
massive support for Prime Minister Ariel Sharon--needs little elaboration.

Accordingly, it is extremely unlikely that in the near or even
foreseeable future the political status of the settlements will change.
Indeed, they will continue to expand, in land and in population. Just as
it would not cross the mind of any sane Jew to evacuate, say, the
residents of Jericho, so the Arabs (and those Jews who delude the Arabs
into believing that armed struggle will "break" the settlements) must
understand that it is no longer possible to evacuate Maale Adumim,
Ariel, Qiryat Arba or Qedumim.

The most important theoreticians and ideologists of the Arab world have
insisted--some still insist--that the State of Israel is a fleeting
episode. Arafat witnessed Israel's hasty withdrawal from Lebanon and
yielded to the temptation to believe that it would behave similarly in
Judea and Samaria. If there is one single Israeli community that has
proven how wrong he was, and that provides the vanguard for the strong
stance of the entire Israeli people, it is the settlers. The Arab world
insists blindly on misreading the substance and true motivation of the
settlers--the historic, Zionist, religious and national ethos that
drives the majority of the settler community.

The settlements, like any living organism, continue to develop and grow.
Last year, despite terrorist attacks on the roads that killed more than
100 men, women and children, the settler population grew by 5.7 percent
(compared to 2.7 percent among Israelis as a whole, including immigrant
absorption, and 10 percent among settlers in a "normal" year).

In the first Intifada, despite casualties from stones and firebombs, the
Jewish community in Judea, Samaria and Gaza tripled in size: from about
50,000 to around 150,000. Today there are some 220,000 settlers. The
Palestinians chose then, as now, to believe the claims of their
supporters from the Israeli extreme left, that the settlers came to
improve their quality of life and that consequently a war of attrition
like that waged over the past 16 months would cause them to flee.

Here too they are wrong. If Maale Adumim and Ariel, for example, have
turned into vibrant cities that attract new (and primarily
non-religious) settlers, this puts the lie to that argument. Even as
Israelis continue to debate "concessions" for peace, additional
settlements like Beitar and Alfei Menashe will reach populations of
15,000 and achieve recognized urban status; the territories will
comprise 4-6 Jewish cities of over 30,000 residents each, some 50
communities of over 5,000 Jews, and around 90 additional communities,
many of them with a population of over 1,000. Does anyone really believe
that, even if the leftist Meretz Party takes power in Israel, it will be
possible to dislodge a population this size? Yet these are the numbers
of settlers that will inhabit the settlements, despite Palestinian
opposition, within a few years.

I do not know precisely what the political status of the settlements
will be in any possible future agreement. One thing is clear: whatever
agreement is reached, no one will remove us by force. Nor can anyone
stop the growth of the settlements in terms of their size and
population. Thus there is wisdom in the assertion that, at least in
these territories, a Palestinian state cannot be established with enough
land to sustain a population the size of that within the Palestinian
Authority, where 96 percent of the Palestinians live in areas A and B. I
believe it is already too late for this to happen. Hence a future
solution will have to draw upon the contribution of additional states,
Jordan and Egypt, to a territorial solution for a Palestinian state.

But this is the topic of another essay.

