The idea of devoting an article to the outposts provokes a principled
objection. After all, what is the point of distinguishing between a
discussion of outposts and a discussion of the entire settlement
enterprise? Clearly the outposts are nothing less than new or expanded
settlements, established in recent years.

In this sense, institutionalizing the "outposts issue" as a separate
topic for discussion is simply one more expression of the success of the
settler right wing in normalizing a prolonged situation in which the
lives of hundreds of thousands of Israelis are lived beyond the state's
sovereign borders, in an area where for generations there has lived
another population devoid of basic rights. Moreover, the mere fact of a
separate discussion of the outposts serves the settlers as an additional
line of defense: anyone who tries to breach it, in the process causing
political and media casualties, will wake up one day to discover that
the "legal settlements" have in the interim tripled and quadrupled in size.

Sound familiar? This in brief is the story of Israeli settlement in the
West Bank over the past ten years.

Here is an example that clearly illustrates the phenomenon. Migron
(about 40 families), HaRoeh (some 15 families) and Havat Gilad (three
families plus a varying number of disturbed youth) are three out of
about 100 outposts scattered around the West Bank whose names come up
every few months when an attempt--usually abortive--is made to remove a
chicken coop or container that was smuggled into them in the dead of night.

Does any serious person with even the slightest knowledge of the network
of settlements that slices the West Bank into tens of separate enclaves,
believe for a minute that the presence of at most 250 Israelis (most of
them infants and children) living in these three settlements in any way
alters the future of Israeli control over the West Bank? The periodic
discussion concerning these or other outposts constitutes precisely that
wall of consciousness and media that the settlers exploit in order to
divert the discussion away from the real questions that Israeli society
must urgently address.

Were a serious discussion ever enjoined regarding the future of the West
Bank and the settlements, the alternative names that would come up would
be those of the three settlements that those three outposts abut: Kochav
Yaakov (about 4,000 people), Eli (some 2,200) and Qadumim (around 3,000
persons). In all three of these settlements, the population has doubled
or tripled in the past decade. Such a discussion would oblige Israeli
society first and foremost to recognize and internalize two simple facts
of life.

First, that two separate peoples, Jewish Israelis and Palestinian Arabs,
live in this land. And second, that it is impossible for the fate of one
of the two peoples to be determined for a prolonged period of time
arbitrarily by the other--precisely the political program the
settlements and outposts were established to implement.

Nevertheless, an historic discussion of the settlements does seem to
spotlight one unique aspect of the outposts--more precisely of some of
the outposts, particularly those established in recent years--that
differs from the overall story of the settlement enterprise.

The establishment of some of the outposts reflects an evolutionary stage
whereby the very strength of the political and bureaucratic
establishment created to serve the settlements began to generate antibodies.

This is the stage when the central Israeli government lost control not
only over the behavior of the settlers but also over the disposition of
the huge resources that the state put at their disposal. Thus there has
evolved a distorted reality in which the heads of the West Bank
settlers' regional councils, who were chosen to collect land taxes in
order to repair roads and sidewalks, have ended up formulating Israel's
foreign and security policies.

Perhaps in a generation or two, when historical perspective allows for
it, someone will write a comprehensive treatise that attempts to sum up
the West Bank settlement enterprise. A quick perusal of the book's index
of names and concepts will likely note that the name Ariel Sharon has
the most references, followed by concepts like "folly", "evil" and
perhaps "naivete" as well.

And, of course, the term "irony".

