Three weeks of relative quiet have worked wonders in Israel.

True, there have been a few terrorist attacks, even fatal ones. But the
daily number of terrorist alerts--one of those statistics Israelis have
learned to study carefully in the morning paper, like the amount of
rainfall in winter and the water level of Lake Kinneret--is down from
some 50-70 to around 20. Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas talks
an anti-terrorism line that many Israelis thought they would never hear
from a Palestinian leader.

The improved security atmosphere has encouraged the economically
deprived, such as single mothers, to demand a better deal and stage
dramatic marches to Jerusalem that have pushed security news back to
page five. Perhaps most impressive of all, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon has exploited the ceasefire achievement to begin mending fences
in Europe.

But unless both Israelis and Palestinians begin genuinely delivering on
the hard and fast demands of the roadmap
                                                , this is liable to
prove a false spring. True, the Palestinian Authority has carried out
vital reforms and reduced violence and incitement. And Israel has
withdrawn from the Gaza Strip and Bethlehem and is releasing some
prisoners. But Palestinians have yet to seriously commence
"dismantlement of terrorist capabilities and infrastructure" and
consolidation of all security organizations into three services that
report to the minister of interior. And Israel has not "taken all
necessary steps" to help the Palestinians, nor has it frozen "all
settlement activity," including the immediate dismantling of all
"outposts erected since March 2001."

Perhaps the biggest problem in judging and facilitating the two sides'
performance is that it is not only the roadmap that determines the
standard of judgment. Each side has a silent partner, who in many cases
is far more influential and important than the letter of the roadmap.

Prime Minister Sharon has United States President George W. Bush. Sharon
insists openly that his actions (or lack thereof) regarding a settlement
freeze and removal of outposts are based not on the roadmap, but on an
agreement with Bush. Hence when the settlements continue to expand and
new outposts replace the few that have been removed--and Bush offers no
objection--Sharon is not cited for a major violation. The same,
obviously, is true regarding release of Palestinian prisoners, which in
any case is referred to only obliquely in the roadmap (through mention
of the Tenet plan): from Sharon's standpoint, this is primarily an
Israeli-American issue, not a roadmap or Israeli-Palestinian issue.

Sharon and Bush appear to have more or less agreed that the other three
partners in the Quartet (the United Nations, European Union and Russia)
that authored the roadmap are of no consequence, and that the roadmap
itself is little more than a loose framework, to be modified by
bilateral American-Israeli agreements. Palestinian and Quartet protests
over the course of the security fence or "wall" had no effect on Sharon
until Washington asked him to freeze construction in order not to
interfere with the roadmap. In this regard it appears to be more
important for Sharon to receive high marks from the administration,
whose backing he considers absolutely essential, particularly if and
when the roadmap fails, than to make peace with the Palestinians.

At least Bush is committed to the roadmap, to democracy and to defeating
terrorism--none of which is the case with Abbas' silent partner, Yasir
Arafat. It is primarily Arafat who thwarts the efforts of Abbas and his
security chief, Mohammad Dahlan, to consolidate the security services
and extend his authority to places like Jenin. It was Arafat who
maneuvered Abbas into resigning from a central Fateh decision-making
institution in protest at challenges to his judgment.

Arafat is not a signatory to the roadmap, and will readily sacrifice it
if he thinks Abbas is usurping too much power in order to implement it.
Bush, on the other hand, remains committed to the spirit if not the
letter of all three phases--though how committed, and for how long, are
matters of conjecture.

In the final analysis, then, no progress report on the roadmap can be
complete, simply because the roadmap is only part of the story. What
happens between Abbas and Arafat will determine whether or not the
Palestinian leadership fights or abets terrorism. And the degree of
bilateral pressure Bush is prepared to apply to Sharon will determine
whether or not settlement activity is rolled back, prisoners are
released and additional territory is turned over to the Palestinians.
Together, these dynamics will chart our shared course in the coming
weeks and months--toward stabilization of the situation, or a return to
terrorism and war. The outcome is by no means certain.

