The current Israeli military offensive in the Palestinian Territories is
a flagrant violation of all international laws and a cataclysm in the
path of a genuine and comprehensive peace in the region. This Israeli
military rampage against Palestinian civilians and their leader Yasser
Arafat has not only crippled the efforts for peace but totally
devastated the Palestinian physical and institutional infrastructure
built over the last 10 years to establish a Palestinian state. Such
horrendous acts perpetrated by Israel have caused more despair for the
advocates of real peace and have outraged the Arab streets.

Nonetheless, the suffering of the Palestinian people at the hands of
war-mongering Israeli soldiers has gained the Palestinian cause dramatic
world support and further cemented Arafat's position in the Arab world
and among Palestinians.

With the help of information technology and satellite transmission, the
Palestinian narrative has been conveyed to a larger number of people
around the globe. Networking and fast communication via the Internet has
given the global community greater access to alternative news sources
and created more awareness of the Palestinian perspective in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

The impact of increased access to information and media alternatives has
been felt most recently through the flow of international volunteers to
the Palestinian Territories to form what is known as the International
Solidarity Movement in Palestine. Furthermore, the explosion of Arab
satellite channels and the images of Palestinian suffering they convey
plays an integral role in mobilizing the Arab masses to express their
anger, ideological leanings and frustrations to their leaders.
Unfortunately, there remains a huge discrepancy between the wishes of
the Arab street and the performance of official Arab governments.

The lack of Arab initiatives for pressuring the United States
administration, together with the presence of a strong Jewish lobby in
the United States, mean that the Palestinian narrative remains only
partially visible, if not distorted, in the US media. In fact, the US
media manipulated by Jewish lobbyists has bolstered the Israeli
narrative by using the incidents of September 11th as a means of
justifying the Israeli military offensive as a "war against terror." The
power of the Jewish lobby over the US public and administration explains
the half-way stance conveyed by the US through Secretary of State Colin
Powell's failed visit and President George W. Bush's recent biased
statements against the Palestinian national cause and leader Yasser Arafat.

The European position on the current political situation in the
Palestinian Territories is more moderate, but remains ineffective,
especially on the official level. The public position, as evidenced in
European newspapers and news broadcasting networks, is more inclined
towards the Palestinian narrative. In Britain, 80 percent of the British
Parliament, which conveys the will of its constituents, expressed
support for freezing military exports to Israel due to the current
violations of the Israeli military in the Palestinian Territories.

As such, the lack of peace in Palestine will have adverse ramifications
on the region and for the international community. It is essential for
the US and the European Union to take a more proactive role in ending
the Israeli occupation, which is the only recipe for peace and security
in the area. Such a political intervention on part of the US and
European administrations is contingent on an international public that
is aware of and in contact with the Palestinian narrative. Therefore,
the establishment of an Arab satellite channel capable of communicating
with the outside world is a vital step for increasing regularized
contact between the regions. In an era of globalization, where political
interests transcend national boundaries, such a bridge of communication
is certain to bring about international participation in resolving the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. A transparent, balanced world media is a
platform for global civil societies to democratize our world and reshape
the mechanism of political decision-making in the context of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

