From early on, Palestinians have complained of the American government
monopoly over the supervision and sponsorship of the peace process. They
believe that American mediation has been hampered by its openly stated
bias towards Israel. The preparations leading up to the peace process
included many false starts, attempts that failed because Palestinians
wanted international sponsorship or an international conference to avoid
American domination of the process. Palestinians, who have equipped
themselves for the negotiations by basing their negotiating positions on
international legality, have always wanted the peace process terms of
reference to be as close as possible to international law and
international forums.

In practice, this peace process was to be launched by an international
conference, the Madrid conference, and sponsored by the two superpowers
of the time, the United States and the Soviet Union. Later, the United
States government became the dominant party, monopolizing sponsorship to
an extent that even Europe was deterred from any serious political
engagement, despite its great interest in regional peace.

But when the peace process collapsed immediately after the Camp David
summit sponsored by the United States, many people blamed the failure on
the American management. Soon after that, the American monopoly began to
fall apart. At Sharm Al Sheikh, in an attempt to extinguish the fire of
the Intifada threatening the region, US President Bill Clinton deputized
the Mitchell committee, which included Turkish, Norwegian and American
representation. That committee produced a report of recommendations that
most perceived as balanced--none of the parties had any major objections.

In this context, Palestinians view even a partial transfer of the Middle
East file from the monopoly of the American government to the hands of
the Quartet as a positive step. On the one hand, the change will
neutralize--albeit however slightly--the negative influence of American
bias towards Israel. On the other hand, an international body composed
of representatives of the United States, United Nations, the European
Union and Russia will have to be more sensitive to international
legitimacy.

Indeed, the work of that committee, although still in its nascent
stages, has already produced changes in the atmosphere, in particularly
taking the sting out of unrealistic and biased positions presented by
the United States. Those positions might have done great damage if they
had not been followed by the subsequent deliberations of the Quartet.
While US President George W. Bush's speech contradicted common sense and
democratic values in its interference in the composition of the
Palestinian leadership, the statement of the Quartet set a distinctively
different tone. A comparison easily demonstrates that the Quartet's
statement was constructive and allowed engagement with both parties, as
well as effecting the possible start of bilateral engagement. Two
practical examples are the task force to be established by the Quartet,
and current European-Arab engagement in certain aspects of Palestinian
reforms.

As such, if this Quartet is the start of a departure from the American
monologue and a move towards international handling of the peace
process, then we are moving in the right direction. There is, however, a
Palestinian minority that harbors nagging suspicions that this Quartet
is only another arm of United States Middle East politics. The work of
the Quartet will be judged upon practical developments and
interventions, which so far appear to be moving in the right
direction.

