An Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement--that inevitably would mandate
the removal of settlements--is not likely in the near future, if only
because all mutual trust has been destroyed and both sides believe they
have no peace partner. Meanwhile the settlements and outposts (which are
essentially nascent settlements) continue to spread, thereby
interlocking the Israeli and Palestinian populations to an ever-greater
degree and reducing yet further the likelihood of a negotiated settlement.

At the same time, a growing proportion of the Israeli population
supports some form of unilateral redeployment, both for security reasons
and due to concern that settlement spread is already beginning to
compromise Israel's democratic and Jewish nature from both a demographic
and a geographic standpoint. Hence if settlements are dismantled in the
foreseeable political future, this is more likely to be a limited
unilateral act--say, in the Gaza Strip or the mountain heartland of the
West Bank--than a function of an Israeli-Palestinian agreement.

The maximum number of settlers whose removal is envisioned according to
the terms of a political agreement, such as the one nearly reached at
Camp David II-Taba in 2000/2001, is around 70,000. Under an initial
unilateral withdrawal, we are probably talking about a considerably
lower number; the total settler population of the Gaza Strip, for
example, is around 6,000.

Assuming that an elected government of Israel commands the parliamentary
majority, and has the political will, to carry out a partial withdrawal
(or for that matter, to dismantle settlements within the framework of an
agreement), it will encounter a number of very serious challenges. Even
a handful of settlers now appear to constitute a problem. One
explanation for the difficulty experienced recently in removing sparsely
populated outposts is the settler establishment's capacity to mobilize
large numbers of reinforcements to man a position and oppose evacuation,
then quickly rebuild the outpost, with all the media coverage involved.
This problem will be multiplied a hundredfold with regard to larger
settlements, unless two solutions are invoked: turning over to
Palestinian rule each settlement as it is evacuated; and taking
advantage of the security fence--in this instance not to keep
Palestinians out of Israel, but to prevent supporters of the settlement
movement from arriving. This is one reason why it will be easier to
evacuate Gaza first; the fence is already there.

One alternative to turning settlements over to the Palestinians intact
is to remove the settlers unilaterally but leave the army there, pending
Israeli-Palestinian negotiations over the fate of the settlements within
a broader political framework. While this approach ostensibly enhances
Israel's negotiating position and reduces damage to its deterrent image
as a result of unilateral moves, it also reduces the level of finality
involved in the removal of the setters: if the IDF (Israel Defense
Forces) is still there, there will be political pressure to allow the
settlers to return.

Nor is it necessarily a foregone conclusion that the physical plant of
the evacuated settlements will be left intact for Palestinian usage. The
famous precedent of Ariel Sharon's destruction of the town of Yamit in
Sinai, in the course of Israel's evacuation more than 20 years ago
within the framework of its peace agreement with Egypt, is usually cited
in a negative light. In fact, by destroying Yamit, Israel added a degree
of finality to its evacuation that almost certainly reduced dangerous
irredentist and revisionist pressures from within Israeli society.
Fifteen years later, it was still possible to read poems of longing for
Yamit in the settlers' monthly, Nekuda, but at least former settlers
were not able to stand on a hilltop with their children and point and
say "You see, there, that's our real home; one day we'll go back
there"--an emotional response very familiar to Israelis from Palestinian
refugee attitudes.

But by the same token, in the Palestinian case, the refugee factor
dictates that Israel take advantage of every possible opportunity to
institute a norm of "return" to the new state and not to Israel, while
creating a reality that could considerably reduce the compensation sums
it pays to Palestinian refugees or to the state of Palestine on their
behalf. The settlements in question and their infrastructure undoubtedly
represent an investment of hundreds of millions of dollars over the
years. Hence if Israel chooses to leave them intact, it should do so
only in accordance with an agreement with the Palestine Liberation
Organization, or alternatively an arrangement with the international
community, whereby the value of the settlements is calculated and
recognized as a factor in eventual final status compensation payments.

But the most difficult and most obvious challenge is the actual physical
removal of settlers, some of whom will invoke passive and even violent
resistance. Settlers opposing evacuation will have high
religious/ideological motivation, and will seek to influence portions of
the governing coalition as well as the security establishment, where in
recent years they have established an increasingly prominent presence.

Settler opposition--political and physical--is the single greatest
obstacle any government will have to overcome; every additional day of
settlement expansion renders this challenge more daunting.

