The meetings held last week in New York and Washington to discuss ways
to deal with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict raise the question as to
whether, under current circumstances, it is at all possible to generate
a new dynamic for peace from outside the region itself. The
answer--provisional, tentative, and pessimistic--is no.

Last week the "Quartet" (the United States, United Nations, European
Union and Russia) met in New York, followed by a visit of the
"Triumvirate" (Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Jordan) to Washington. The only way
these parties, led by the US, could conceivably have some substantive
influence on the course of events between Israelis and Palestinians is
if they were to decide to impose a solution on them, or at least to
exercise heavy pressure on both. An "international" solution for the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict requires that the US, the EU and the
moderate Arabs be in a high degree of consensus on all the major issues,
and share a high level of determination to act. In fact, they have
neither consensus nor determination.

The US and its dialogue partners clearly agree on the need to end
terrorism and jump start a process of elections and reform, leading to
peace negotiations and a Palestinian state. But beyond this common
denominator there are serious differences of approach. These touch on
the status of Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat, the nature of a three
year transition process, the phasing of eventual Israeli concessions on
settlements and territory, and the allocation of funds to the
Palestinian Authority.

Moreover, behind these disagreements lie significant additional
differences in the international actors' sense of determination, or lack
thereof. The US assigns top priority to the war on terrorism, including
the removal of violent leaders like Saddam Hussein. The administration's
second priority is to win the midterm elections in November. The
Israeli-Palestinian issue must not be allowed to interfere with either
priority. The Europeans and Arabs are generally lukewarm if not out and
out negative about US intentions toward Iraq. In some cases they feel
obliged to cooperate, however reluctantly, with an American war effort
projected for next fall or winter. But they constantly emphasize the
need to make progress on Palestine in order to make a war effort against
Iraq more palatable to their publics.

There are also important subtexts and subtleties in the American
approach. On some issues of substance, such as the need for reciprocal
Israeli gestures and concessions in parallel to a reduction of violence,
Colin Powell and the State Department appear to be closer to the 4 + 3
than to the Pentagon hawks. At the level of American interagency
politics, State argues that the administration must be more flexible on
the Palestinian issue if it wants to get the 4 + 3 on board for the
campaign against Iraq.

But Powell is clearly not making American policy in the Middle East, and
European influence is very limited. Because of the upcoming elections
and the administration's priorities in its war against terrorism, it
seems safe to assert that it will not seriously pressure Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon to cease settlement building or to offer the
Palestinians a realistic peace process as an incentive to end the
violence. Nor will it openly challenge Sharon's belief, which runs
counter to any conceivable Israeli-Palestinian peace process, that
Israel must have a long term military and settlement presence throughout
most of the West Bank and Gaza. By the same token, the US will not
seriously pressure the Europeans and Arabs to force Arafat--by
withholding money and legitimization--to cease the violence and the
incitement, and to alter his unacceptable positions on refugees and the
Temple Mount. And since it is the negative leadership of both Arafat and
Sharon that constitutes the key ingredient of the current crisis,
nothing seems likely to change for the better regarding
Israeli-Palestinian rapprochement.

But things do change in the Middle East. Indeed, in past decades it has
been events in the Middle East itself that force themselves upon the
reluctant decisionmakers in Washington, Berlin and Cairo. The four and
the three may believe they have bought themselves time--for Iraq, for
elections, for summer vacation--through their meetings. Yet in recent
years, August and September have frequently been months of momentous
events in or related to the Middle East: whether the unveiling of the
Oslo process, Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, the outbreak of the current
Intifada--or the al-Qaida attack on the United States.

This summer may be no different.

