It must be said at the outset that the establishment of the settlements
and their expansion were the means through which the Israeli occupation
was born and since maintained. Hence, the removal of the settlements is
about undoing the occupation and making amends, and cannot be detached
from this context.

There are three important points that stem from this starting point. The
first is the recognition that, as long as the expansion of the
settlements continues, there will be no solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The answer lies in ending the Israeli
occupation (and therefore land confiscation, settlement construction,
and now the wall), because the occupation is the source of all violence
between the two sides.

Second, this linkage between Israel's occupation and settlement policy
extends beyond the obvious land grab. The settlements have a very
significant impact on Palestinian life in that they interrupt the
contiguity of the Palestinian territories, reduce Palestinian economic
viability and control Palestinian water resources.

Finally, in physical geography, the settlements sit on wide swathes of
land. Much of the land they are located on was confiscated in a manner
contravening international law, and therefore, in the course of
correcting this injustice, the land should be returned to its rightful
owners. Most of the original Palestinian landowners are still living and
have the deeds showing ownership in their hands. In other cases, the
land can be made "public land," and put in the care of the Palestinian
government.

Because of the concentration and size of the settlements, any thought of
solving the settlement problem must begin with stopping their
construction, infrastructure development and government incentives
offered to attract homebuyers, and the reverse put into play. Making the
settlements less financially attractive to live in will take care of a
great deal of the current problem. Second, the Israeli government must
make clear to its public that the Palestinian territories will be in one
way or another under the control of a Palestinian state, and that
Palestinian legal jurisdiction will apply to the settlements. After
that, the actual removal of the settlements may be undertaken in a
gradual manner through long-term arrangements and the like. The
important point to be made here is that Israeli settlers now living in
the occupied territories may stay in the Palestinian state, perhaps for
economic or religious reasons, provided that they abide by the laws of
that state. There will be no more expropriation of land not legally
their own, and no further infringing on the rights of Palestinians.

The concept of a land swap that was accepted by the Palestinian
leadership in the Camp David negotiations, and later approved by the
Central Council of the Palestine Liberation Organization, might also be
used to attach some settlements along the 1967 borders to Israel,
provided that we are talking about a very small stretch of land adjacent
to the green line, to be exchanged for land of equal quality and
quantity on the western side of the 1967 borders. There should be no
confusion that Palestinians perceive East Jerusalem or its old city any
differently from the rest of the occupied West Bank. While Israel has
tried to separate the city, international law is clear--the insertion of
new populations in occupied land is a violation and applies equally to
Nablus, Gaza or East Jerusalem.

Just as the expanding settlement project has been responsible for
continuing the conflict and consolidating the occupation and thereby
fuelling instability and violence, reversing the settlement process is
the cornerstone to building a peace based on trust, confidence and
mutual recognition between Palestinians and Israelis.

