Speaking broadly, Palestinians saw the speech of Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon                         given at the Herzliya conference as
one of the most dangerous Israeli plans to imperil the peace process and
the Israeli and Palestinian peoples. This plan proposes to use the wall
that Israel has built along the outlines of a 35-year-old settlement
expansion project in order to determine by force the final arrangements
for the Palestinian territories. In his speech, Sharon talked explicitly
about consolidating illegal settlements, rather than removing them, with
no regard for Israel's obligation to stop building settlements according
to the roadmap                                                 . While
Sharon gave a verbal nod to the roadmap, he also reaffirmed his speech
in Aqaba earlier this year, which includes the multiple Israeli
reservations to the roadmap. In other words, Sharon is trying again to
escape the roadmap plan backed by the United States and the
international community.

One of the most ironic aspects of Sharon's speech, and one that can only
be explained as an attempt to boost public relations, is his
justification of these threats of unilateral action by an alleged lack
of roadmap implementation on the part of the Palestinian Authority.
Quite the opposite, it was the Palestinian Authority that accepted the
roadmap with no reservations, while Israel burdened its acceptance with
14 qualifications that turned the roadmap on its head. It was the
Palestinian Authority that instituted a ceasefire and thus adhered to
the clause that calls on Palestinians to stop all kinds of violence
against Israelis wherever they may be, while Israel did nothing to
fulfill its own obligation to stop violence against Palestinians
everywhere, nor to fulfill even those obligations that have no security
implications, such as halting settlement expansion in the occupied
territories. The main Palestinian Authority obligation to the roadmap
that remains unfulfilled is its adoption of a security role. This will
only be possible once Israel ends its military reoccupation and allows
the Palestinian side to rebuild its security forces crippled by the
Israeli crackdown on the Palestinian security apparatuses.

As such, from a Palestinian perspective, it is simply chutzpah that
allows Ariel Sharon to call this a "disengagement" plan, when in fact it
will consolidate Israel's occupation of Palestinians and disengage
inside the occupied territories, not from the occupied territories as a
whole. This is not about "disengagement", but rearranging things in a
manner that suits the occupier and is definitely at the political and
economic expense of the occupied.

