Israelis and Palestinians, each in their own way, have always maintained
an acute sensitivity to the perceptions of the outside world. Israel was
established through external support and depended heavily for its
survival on outside economic, diplomatic and military assistance.
Palestinians, for their part, became sensitized to world opinion in the
mid-seventies when it became apparent that, as the weaker party, they
must solicit strength and backing from those outside. It was for that
reason that Palestinians changed their strategic thinking and dropped
their demand for the fulfillment of their rights to regain historic
Palestine, instead basing their position on that supported by
international law. The argument for doing so, in fact, was that
Palestinians would then gain support from the international community
that was responsible for implementing those same resolutions.

The climax of both parties' adherence and sensitivity to world opinion
was the establishment of the peace process. Palestinians were not at all
happy with the conditions placed on their participation, but were unable
to fend off international pressure. By the same token, the reluctant
Israeli government led by right wing prime minister Yitzhak Shamir was
pressed to come to the table. When that peace process then collapsed,
both sides found themselves disappointed by the subsequent turn in
international support.

There is no doubt, however, that Palestinians have felt that
disappointment more acutely. Perhaps the most significant component in
the misunderstanding and miscommunication of the Palestinian position
were the Palestinian suicide bombings. These bombings were not only
justifiably condemned by the world, but they were decontextualized and
viewed by the international community as an inexplicable new kind of
terrorism, a view that then resulted in a demonization of the
Palestinian cause. This sentiment became even more pronounced after the
events of September 11.

In turn, those Palestinians who supported the bombings were not so much
indifferent to international public opinion, as unable to understand its
essence. They believed that the world would see the Israeli state
terrorism and atrocities against Palestinians civilians from the start
of the Intifada (with at first very few casualties on the other side)
and at least be able to understand Palestinian rage at their great human
loss and complete helplessness to do anything about it.

Palestinians also expected the world to be able to view the violence by
both sides within the context of the ongoing belligerent Israeli
military occupation, which is in direct contravention of international law.

Finally, Palestinians expected those with some knowledge of the region
to understand its complexities--i.e., that Palestinian violence against
Israeli civilians, violence that Hamas began and insisted on continuing,
was not only intended to harm Israelis, but also to harm the Palestinian
Authority and the Palestinian peace camp (one notes that with the lack
of world understanding and intervention, the centrist Fateh-affiliated
Al Aqsa Martyr's Brigades is now trying to outdo Hamas in order to keep
itself at the forefront of the Palestinian political spectrum).

These "misunderstandings" have been aggravated to the point that
Palestinians are now at a total loss as to why the world, in particular
the United States, is willing to allow the current conditions to
continue. The Israeli army massacre in Jenin was carried out with
official Israeli disrespect for the requirements of international law,
not only regarding Palestinians, but towards international humanitarian
bodies including the Red Cross. The world's lack of sensitivity for the
level of Israeli atrocities, and its willingness to tolerate what most
international legal bodies have characterized as "unnecessary killing"
or "war crimes" has been extremely disappointing from the Palestinian
point of view.

Palestinians were not surprised, on the other hand, by the immovability
of the Israeli public in the face of the military crimes. Palestinians
are used to the Israeli defense mechanism of self-isolation in the face
of world criticism. Suddenly, when verbal criticisms are made against
the Israeli killing of Palestinian civilians and the unneeded
destruction of civilian structures like the ministries of education,
health and bureau of statistics, Israelis convince themselves that the
criticisms are not real, but the manifestations of anti-Semitism. (That
is not in any way meant to "explain" or justify unconscionable racist
attacks on Jews or Jewish institutions around the world.)

This defense mechanism prevents the Israeli people from seriously
examining its own policies and being affected by negative changes in
international public opinion against Israel. These sensitivities in
Israelis are something that the Palestinian people are acutely aware of
themselves.

To make matters worse, the Israeli media seems to have lost its
professionalism as the state puts on hold one integral component of
democracy--the right to know. The Israeli people simply have no idea
what their army is doing in the Palestinian territories. The vast
majority of Israelis believe that the army is attacking "terrorist
bases" in the Palestinian areas and that the resulting casualties have
been to "terrorists" or those who support them. They don't know and they
don't want to know that the main target of this Israeli operation was
the Palestinian Authority. The numbers show that some two-thirds of
Palestinian casualties were in fact incurred by civilians.

And even though Israel now faces criticism from varying quarters, the
strong states in the world are not reflecting that criticism in their
diplomacy. Each has its own interests to pursue and remains immobilized
by historic sensitivities, first for the deep wound caused by European
atrocities against the Jewish people in Europe especially during World
War II, as well as towards the role that Israel played in favor of
regional Western interests during the Cold War. These factors have
created a gap between the very values professed by these states and
their commitment to international law, on the one hand, and the tendency
to handle Israel as if it is a country somehow above the law, on the other.

Despite its failings to date, international opinion continues to
maintain great leverage over both Palestinians and Israelis. As has
succeeded in the past, the United Nations Security Council or
governments mediating on behalf of international institutions should
continue to use the leverage available to them to enforce a solution to
this conflict in a way supported by international law.

