Q: You have been a vocal proponent of the importance of
holding elections for a long time now. But is there any added importance
to them now after the passing of President Yasser Arafat?

A: Certainly. To a large extent elections are always important
because of the need to gain legitimacy for the political system, any
political system. But especially now, that Arafat, who had the
legitimacy of the legacy and the PLO, is gone, it becomes extremely
critical that Palestinians have elections or face violent internal
infighting, competition within the nationalist movement between young
guard and old guard, and between nationalists and Islamists. So it
certainly is critical at the moment to go to elections as soon as possible.

Q: You feel those are the options? Elections or infighting?

A: Absolutely. If we do not go to elections, in my view there
will be bloody, internal infighting.

Q: At the moment everyone seems focused on presidential
elections. Is it important to hold all the elections, municipal and
legislative as well, or are the presidential elections the most important?

A: I think the most important elections are the legislative
elections and that we need to have legislative elections, or start a
credible election process for the legislature, as soon as possible. I
think that is the most critical need at the moment. Presidential and
local elections are certainly important as well, but in terms of helping
Palestinians avoid internal infighting, I think it is critical to have
legislative elections as soon as possible.

Q: What chances do you see of the Islamist factions,
particularly Hamas and Islamic Jihad, participating in such elections?

A: I have absolutely no doubt that most, if not all, the
Islamist groups will participate in the legislative elections. This is
going to be their golden opportunity to become active in the Palestinian
political system, to gain a strong voice in the Palestinian parliament,
and therefore essentially affect decision-making at all levels, but in
particular with regard to legislation. They are not likely to become
part of the government, and it is for this reason that they don't care
about, and probably won't participate in, the presidential elections.
But they are, I believe, very much interested in gaining a very
important and strong opposition voice in the political institutions. I
think they recognize that because they failed to do so in 1996, they
became highly marginal in Palestinian politics for the next four years,
1996 to 2000. I doubt very much they would want to repeat that mistake
again.

Q: But aren't they in a bind? Wouldn't participating in
legislative elections be an implicit acknowledgement of the Oslo
agreements?

A: To a large extent there is recognition in Palestinian society
and in the political system that the Oslo agreements have long since
disappeared as practical guidelines for policy-making. And to a large
extent there is a perception that the Palestinian legislature will be
able to decide on its own what it wants to do with no limitations
imposed by the Oslo agreements. There is recognition that this does not
apply to the government, that practical realities on the ground requires
coordination and perhaps cooperation with the Israelis at certain levels
whether it is in civil administration or in security matters. And that
is certainly something the Islamists will want to avoid doing, and
therefore will avoid becoming a part of the government.

Q: Clearly it is logistically not that easy to hold
elections at the moment. What needs to be done?

A: First of all we need to immediately deal with our own
electoral system, which is currently being reviewed. I believe most of
the work has already been completed. The parliament probably needs two
more weeks to vote on the amended elections law.

Second, we need to bring about an internal agreement among all the
factions on a ceasefire during the election campaign and on election day
itself.

Third, we need the Israelis to respect this internal ceasefire by
observing a ceasefire of their own, and stop their incursions and the
assassinations.

Fourth, we need the Israelis to pull out from the cities and remove the
checkpoints during the election period so people can freely move about
and so candidates can promote their views without fearing assassination
or arrest by the Israelis.

Q: All of sudden, it seems, there is great international
interest in Palestinian elections. Outgoing US Secretary of State Colin
Powell has expressed an interest in the US financially aiding the
elections, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon has suddenly come out in
favor of Jerusalemites voting, when it was very difficult for them to
even register for elections earlier this year. Why?

A: I think there is recognition that the absence of Arafat from
the scene creates certain opportunities and Washington and Israel are
wary of making the same mistake they made in 2003, in terms of missing
an opportunity with the appointment of Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas) as
prime minister. There is that recognition today, and I think neither the
Israelis nor the Americans want to give the impression that they are
going to squander this opportunity as well.

Q: Are you confident that the elections will take place?

A: At the moment I think the decision seems to require
Palestinian agreement first, and that, at the moment, is not yet
available. The Palestinian leadership wants to hold presidential
elections instead of legislative elections, which I think is a mistake
because it makes it a lot more difficult to gain internal consensus on a
ceasefire. Those that are opposed to presidential elections or might not
gain from presidential elections, might fear there is a certain hidden
agenda on the part of the Palestinian Authority to avoid legislative
elections, and may make it impossible to hold elections by refusing to
abide by a cease-fire agreement.

Also, while Israel talks about Jerusalemites being able to vote in other
cities, this was not what was done in 1996, and I think Palestinians
will insist that Jerusalemites vote the same way they voted in 1996.

In addition, what will the Israelis do once a Palestinian ceasefire is
in place? Are they willing to evacuate the cities and remove the
checkpoints? All these questions are still hanging there.

I think there is a desire at the moment on the part of the Palestinian
Authority, the Israelis and the Americans to facilitate presidential
elections. But this is not the most important thing for us. I believe
that if we can hold presidential elections, we can certainly hold
legislative elections, and if we waste the opportunity to hold
legislative elections we would be making a big mistake.

Q: In other words you feel, like Hamas, that presidential
and legislative elections should be held on the same day?

A: Absolutely.

