The creation of the Quartet appears to be one more episode in the
history of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process in which key players
pull together due to concerns that one of them (namely the United
States) is running off in an unwise direction. The Europeans are
glomming on to a quadripartite formation with the Americans, a setback
for those of us who had hoped that the Europeans would acquire more
policy independence. At the same time that the Quartet may put some
brakes on the dominant superpower, it neutralizes any independent action
by the Europeans.

Still, it is not as if the European Union were ready with a major
foreign policy initiative. The problem of the EU is the problem of its
institutionalized Common Foreign and Security Policy. Nothing can be
done without the agreement of all 15 states. Of these, several have
important individual foreign policy preoccupations and special
interests. The British want to maintain a special relationship with the
Americans; the French want the freedom to maintain their own independent
international profile and agendas; and the Germans want nothing to do
with policies appearing unfriendly to Israel, home to victims of the
Nazi Holocaust.

Also in the Quartet is the United Nations. While the UN secretary
general has been on very amicable terms with successive American
administrations, the United Nations itself has a public discourse that
is bound by its Charter, public international law and recognizing the
relationship between peace and security on the one hand, and respect for
human rights and democratic principles on the other.

These three players in the Quartet--the Secretary General's office, the
Europeans and the Russians (albeit still considered minor
contributors)--are not quite comfortable with the locomotive of American
global policy that has now thoughtlessly taken up Israel's long-standing
maneuvering to undermine the foundations of international humanitarian
law for its own purposes. For it part, Israel wants to enjoy maximum
freedom as an occupying power to destroy the public institutional
frameworks of the Palestinians and to destroy once again the
territorial, infrastructural, institutional and demographic foundations
from which a modern Palestinian urban political and economic culture
might re-emerge. Like several previous Israeli governments, Sharon's
view is that it is better to deal with the Palestinians as a fragmented,
tribal sub-state entity.

It is worth noting that this flies in the face of all that Europe has
pursued in the Mediterranean region. The EU has committed itself to
stimulating reforms driven by the process of free trade that would help
foster the re-emergence of outward-looking, tolerant urban-based
civilizations in the Mashreq, the Maghreb and Egypt. Europe desperately
wants respite from the nightmare of insecurity and instability, lack of
progress and lack of economic growth that has characterized the tribal
and autocratic political and social orders that emerged since the
forties from the destruction and decay of the urban economic and
cultural centers in the region--a process that included the Palestinian
Naqba. Europe wants a stable, prosperous, cooperative and economically
engaged southern and eastern Mediterranean neighbor.

That is why the issue of Palestinian "reform" has been a key European
concern for some time--long before Israel picked up the slogan. However
impatient the Europeans got with Palestinian resistance to vitally
needed reforms, Europe appears to have always understood the need for
Palestinians to lead reforms for Palestinians. Unfortunately, the slogan
of "reform" has recently been hijacked by a disingenuous US agenda aimed
more at manipulating Palestinian national politics, and an even more
disingenuous Israeli agenda aimed at destroying Palestinian national
politics. Still, the reform package, plagued by all these contradictions
beneath the surface, has found traction. Under these conditions the
Europeans cannot suddenly say no to demands for Palestinian reform. They
can only hope to steer the reform project away from the destructive
directions that Israel, and, for different reasons, the US wish to take it.

The Quartet's moves to date have reflected these internal differences.
Everybody has gone for "reform" and everybody has gone for the need to
give a political horizon to the Palestinians based on a fully sovereign
and viable state. Basically, everyone is trying to file down the sharp
edges of the others' eccentric positions. As a result, it is even more
improbable that Europe will attempt to maintain any pretence of
independence.

None of this give or take, however, will correct the fatal flaw of the
peace process begun at Madrid. Israel maintained its refusal to be bound
by the principles of international humanitarian law--which prohibited
its establishment of settlements, expropriations of Palestinian land and
numerous other predatory and repressive measures that it regularly took
against the civilian population. Ever since US Secretary of State James
Baker asked his Palestinian interlocutors in Jerusalem during the run-up
to the Madrid Conference "what do you want: to clean up the occupation
or to end it?", the US managed to persuade skeptical Europeans and
credulous Palestinians that its would be possible to build confidence
between the Israeli and Palestinian sides, achieve political
rapprochement and end Israel's occupation, without requiring Israel to
respect international humanitarian law in the interim.

Baker's words were later mouthed by Palestinian leaders who truly
believed that the Americans were on the verge of delivering a political
magic hat trick--pulling political justice out of thin air. Palestinians
argued that demanding the implementation of international humanitarian
law would only hamper the American effort by insisting on something that
the Israelis would surely refuse. Time and time again, in the framework
of the Oslo process Palestinian leaders enthusiastically signed
agreements that treated key internationally-guaranteed rights protected
by international humanitarian law as if they did not exist. This gave
the rest of the world, including the Europeans, the excuse they sought
for doing almost nothing to restrain Israel's violations--and for not
incurring Israeli and American displeasure.

While elements of the Palestinian leadership have attempted to invoke
the Fourth Geneva Convention in times of crisis, the international will
to stand behind the Convention has been seriously weakened. The European
Union may well recognize that the belated enforcement of international
humanitarian law offers the only hope for mounting a successful process
of Palestinian reform and the only basis for restraining Israel's
efforts to force Palestinian society back into a fragmented and
easily-controlled tribal order under a revived Israeli Civil
Administration. However, the dynamics of the Quartet, and continued
official Palestinian faux pas make it unlikely that Europe will make any
moves in this direction.

Several weeks before the Quartet meeting Switzerland summoned the
courage to circulate a "non-paper" proposing the mobilization of an
initiative including the Quartet to reintroduce the discipline of
humanitarian law into the Palestinian-Israeli process, and the
establishment of an international monitoring presence for this purpose.
A copy was delivered to two senior Palestinian officials during one of
Ramallah's curfews. It was forgotten. The Palestinian official
responsible for diplomatic follow-up never received a copy. There was no
Palestinian follow-up. Predictably in such circumstances, little or no
interest was shown by the states to whom it was circulated.

Those Palestinians who advocate Palestinian reform for the Palestinian
good are definitely on the right track. But we and our friends will have
to recognize that we have a lot of reforms to accomplish on lots of
fronts. We have to come to grips with the fact that we are a long way
from ending Israel's occupation in a satisfactory fashion. We need to
re-think our struggle and not become unwitting accomplices to the
strategies of our adversaries. We cannot allow ourselves to be reduced
to impotent, easily controlled tribal champions of tribal causes--the
unaware products of a second Naqba. We need to better understand and use
the political logic and protective potential of the law, and welcome its
burdens and constraints. We need to learn how not to squander the little
points of leverage we may command, and how to enlist the benign
self-interest of other powerful actors who would prefer us to succeed.
But we must first understand what success entails.

These are unfair burdens to place on any hugely oppressed people. They
are also our keys to survival.

