Consider the facts as Israel understands them. The world's top terrorist
base for suicide bombers was located in the single square kilometer of
the Jenin refugee camp, where the Palestinian Islamic Jihad, supported
by Iran and Syria, was dominant. At least 20 of the recent suicide
bombers who deliberately attacked Israeli civilians inside Israel came
from this base. When Israel attacked it, its defenders strapped on
explosive vests and booby-trapped homes and narrow lanes, taking a
considerable toll in Israeli soldiers' lives.

The Israel Defense Forces weighed and rejected the obvious, "American"
option, of simply bombing the entire camp into oblivion. Instead, they
repeatedly called upon civilians to leave. Eventually, to deal with the
terrorist holdouts, the IDF bulldozed about 100 buildings in the center
of the camp, leaving booby-trapped bodies under the rubble. Yes,
tragically, some civilians were killed. Yes, widespread infrastructure
damage was inevitably caused. No, the IDF did not deliberately target
innocent civilians. It fought a just war.

Now Israel is accused worldwide of a "massacre." The accusation feeds
widespread comparisons between the Holocaust and the Israeli military
operation in the West Bank. Europeans are weighing a variety of
sanctions. Italian leftists march in Rome dressed approvingly as suicide
bombers. The United Nations has decided to investigate.

Why are we singled out and falsely accused? Why the world's double
standard? Why is legitimate--and needed--criticism of Israel so devalued
by these calumnies?

Some of the answers are obvious, and relate to Israeli mistakes and
misdeeds. There is nothing here to justify accusations of holocaust and
massacres. Nevertheless, there are some indefensible positions that
render it easier to criticize Israel. For example, the ongoing and
anachronistic occupation of most of the West Bank and Gaza, and
expansion and fortification of settlements that constitute a key
provocation in the eyes of Palestinians, many Israelis, and all of the
world. Or the systematic loss of credibility, since this Intifada
started, of the IDF Spokesman, who has rarely if ever been able or
willing to explain acts of humiliation and dehumanization of
Palestinians by Israeli soldiers at roadblocks. Or the needless delay in
allowing journalists into the Jenin camp. Or the simple fact that the
current Israeli government has no realistic strategy for peace to
accompany, and put into perspective, its justified determination to
stamp out terrorist bases like Jenin. Or the counterproductive siege of
Arafat's headquarters.

Or the clumsy attempts by some Israeli spokespersons to borrow the
metaphors of September 11 ("Arafat is our bin Laden") and to portray the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict as if it did not have political and human
dimensions that require political and human solutions. These render it
more difficult rather than easier for Israel to convey the horror of
suicide bombings to world opinion--although it must be noted, with
gratitude, that the United States administration and public have by and
large remained supportive of Israel.

Some of the answers should be obvious, but seemingly are not. Israel's
hard-line supporters in the US, mainly Jewish and fundamentalist
Christian organizations, make the mistake of lobbying on the basis of an
"Israel can do no wrong" position that ultimately damages Israel's
credibility even further. Israel's military campaign has in some ways
played into the hands of a Palestinian strategy designed to
internationalize the conflict, regardless of the cost in Palestinian
lives and well-being.

Some of the answers reflect objective realities that even the most
talented Israeli spokesperson has difficulty dealing with. We are the
occupier; the Palestinians are the occupied, fighting a war of
liberation. We have tanks and attack helicopters, their only weapon is
themselves. As the underdog, they are permitted to smuggle weapons and
suicide bombers in ambulances, but we may not shoot at ambulances. In
short, no matter what we do, they look far more appealing to an
otherwise neutral TV audience in a 20 second clip, which is what public
diplomacy has been reduced to these days. And where the audience is by
definition not neutral--when satellite stations like al-Jezira enter the
homes of 200 million Arabs--we don't have a chance.

Finally, and most significantly, some of the answers are extremely
disturbing. The Muslim world is being systematically indoctrinated with
anti-Semitic diatribes by Islamic extremists. Europe caters to the
millions of Muslims on its electoral lists and nurtures its own legacy
of anti-Semitism. The Europeans are particularly frightened of the shock
waves emanating from potential instability in Morocco and elsewhere in
the Maghreb. Some European leftists now appear to be adopting Yasir
Arafat, who is by any objective standard a terrorist murderer and a
pathological liar, the way they worshiped the mass murderer Mao Tze Tung
30 years ago.

As Oriani Fallaci, often a harsh critic of Israel, put it on April 12,
all this is "much more grim and revolting because it is conducted and
nourished by those who hypocritically pose as do-gooders, progressives,
communists, pacifists, Catholics."

Twenty-first-century anti-Semitism is being directed not just against
synagogues in Tunisia and Europe, but against the Jewish state itself.
Absolutely nothing Israel has done could conceivably justify this
phenomenon. This is the most alarming truth of the current campaign
against Israel.

