The Israeli reaction to the events in the Jenin refugee camp raises
several significant questions. Why indeed does the vast majority of
Israelis--not just extreme rightists--appear not to be reacting to the
killing of numerous innocent civilians, including children? Even if
there was no deliberate massacre; even if we can argue that it was the
terrorists who forced innocent civilians to remain in their booby
trapped homes who bear the guilt for their deaths--why haven't we heard
at least an expression of condolence on the part of the Israeli public
mainstream, with the exception of a few eternal peace professionals? Why
this anger at United Nations envoy Terje Larsen, even after he
repeatedly explained that he did not say and never intended to say that
Israel carried out a massacre in Jenin?

The sad answer to these questions appears to be that the conflict has
reached such a level of hostility that every incident is perceived as a
zero-sum exercise. Thus, even someone expressing sadness upon the death
of Palestinian children is perceived as a "traitor" who is not
sufficiently grieving over the death of his own people.

The Palestinians appear to have a larger responsibility for the
deterioration of the situation. This can be proven with a simple
chronology: until the Passover massacre in Netanya and the Israeli
offensive that followed, official Israel, and many rank-and-file
Israelis, continued to express sorrow over Palestinian civilian
casualties, particularly children, that were caused by Israeli actions.
In contrast the Palestinians focused on indiscriminate terrorism
directed against Israeli civilians; women, children and the aged were
"preferred" targets no less than soldiers. (I do not intend here, God
forbid, to legitimize attacks on soldiers, but simply to state that a
war against soldiers could still be considered within the acceptable
"rules" of war, in contrast with attacks upon civilians, including
settlers.)

It is the focus of the current war on civilians--in contrast with all of
Israel's previous wars (including the 1948 War of Independence, in which
civilian casualties were secondary targets)--that has generated the
sense that this is a total war, one between peoples. Hence the absence
of compassion. If they have no pity on our children (actually, on their
own children as well), why should we have pity on theirs?

But there is more. What has sharpened the Israeli lack of compassion is
the international campaign to protest Israel's acts of self-defense. The
combination of these two phenomena has gone to the depths of Jewish
identity to arouse primeval gut Jewish emotions. For the first time
since the Holocaust (perhaps with the exception of the days that
preceded the Six-Day War on 1967) Jews--this time in their Israeli
identity--have again felt that their backs are to the wall: they are
struggling not only for their physical existence, but for their right to
exist in principle. Even if these sensations are exaggerated, they
cannot be denigrated or dismissed; a people that has experienced the
mass extermination of the Holocaust has the full right to fear for its
fate in more "minor" situations as well.

One of the "proofs" in Israeli eyes of the totality of the struggle is
the recent wave of anti-Semitic incidents in Europe. If the Palestinians
explain terrorism against Israel as one aspect of a general escalation
of their national struggle, how do they explain the wave of attacks on
Jews and Jewish institutions in Europe? After all, the Jews of Europe
bear no responsibility for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; why should
they suffer as its victims? Thus if they are indeed the targets of a
wave of attacks, this strengthens the sense that we are confronting a
total offensive against our very national existence. The silence of
Palestinians and other Arabs in the face of these attacks proves
ostensibly that they are satisfied with them--whereas were Jews, even
under present circumstances, to attack mosques in Europe, no doubt the
entire Jewish leadership, including in Israel, would raise its voice in
protest.

Accordingly if the Arab states, and particularly Palestinians, want to
invoke a confidence-building measure that might restore among Israelis
the sense that this is not an all-out struggle over Jewish national
existence but rather a Palestinian struggle for national freedom--they
could, for example, launch a public diplomacy campaign against attacks
on Jews worldwide, and especially in Europe. If Palestinians make their
voices heard on this issue then perhaps the sense of total struggle will
diminish, and Israelis, too, can express sorrow over the deaths of
Palestinian children, regardless of the situation in which they were
killed and the question of responsibility for their deaths.

