The January 9, 2005 elections for the chairman or president (rais) of
the Palestinian Authority are now the dominant theme in Palestinian
political life, Israeli-Palestinian relations, and the international
community's involvement. All in all this is a positive development, and
the Palestinian political community is to be commended for moving so
quickly and decisively in this direction in the aftermath of Yasser
Arafat's death. The early politicking is reminiscent of the 1996
elections, when Palestine's nascent democracy was the envy of the Arab
world, and before things went so sour for both Palestinians and Israelis.

A number of issues have to be clarified before the full significance, or
lack thereof, of these elections can be understood and internalized by
the parties.

First, when it comes to peace process issues, Israel is treaty-bound to
negotiate with the Palestine Liberation Organization, not the
Palestinian Authority. This is clearly stipulated in the Oslo
Declaration of Principles. The PLO has already selected its new leader,
Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas). The January 9 elections will, if Abu Mazen
wins, confirm leadership through a democratic process and signify that
the posts of PLO leader and PA leader are effectively synonymous.

Secondly, insofar as the Palestinian political establishment is now
determined to manage its affairs in accordance with the Palestinian
constitution and the rule of law, which Arafat so readily flouted, the
important figure in Palestinian Authority political life is going to be
the prime minister, not the rais, whose position is largely symbolic.
Abu Ala (Ahmed Qurei) already holds this post, and seems likely to
continue to hold it if Abu Mazen is elected president.

Indeed, it behooves us to recall that throughout the past two years,
Israel, the United States and to a large extent the European Union
exercised heavy pressure on Arafat to behave like a figurehead
president--"like President Katzav in Israel"--as stipulated in the
Palestinian constitution, and to delegate more authority to the prime
minister. Thus when President Bush and British PM Blair place so much
emphasis on Palestinian presidential elections they are sending a
confusing message: with Arafat it was all personal; his successor will
be viewed as the primary political leader regardless of the
constitution. This begs the question: what will they do if the
Palestinians elect a new president who has extreme views?

One conclusion that emerges from this analysis concerns the importance
of new elections to the Palestinian Legislative Council. If the new
president acquiesces in his constitutional role, the council will
finally wield real power. In order for Palestinian democracy to triumph,
then, we have to witness council elections too, the sooner, the better.

A second conclusion concerns the Israeli role and the attitude of PM
Sharon. Thus far Sharon has made the right gestures concerning the
facilitation of Palestinian elections, including in East Jerusalem, in
accordance with the line emanating from Washington. If we make a leap of
faith and assume for a moment that those elections go smoothly and
empower a moderate Palestinian leader who resolutely opposes violence,
then Sharon will be in a predicament: within a short time, he will not
be able to suffice with disengagement alone, and will have to address
the issue of a renewed peace process. This he is neither personally nor
ideologically equipped to do. Accordingly, we encounter the risk that he
will try to thwart the entire process in order to avoid having to
approach this slippery slope.

Further, before we can make a leap of faith we must first address the
reality on the ground in Palestine. Neither Abu Mazen nor Abu Ala has
strong grassroots support or readily available "divisions". It is
politically convenient for them to place the onus of ending violence and
incitement on Israel. In this context, Sharon's readiness to forego the
dismantling of terrorist organizations for the time being and his
insistence that instead the Palestinian leadership concentrate on ending
incitement against Israel and Jews, is a reasonable demand. The current
Palestinian leadership, however temporary, also has obligations to
Israel. If it proves unable to confront Palestinian terrorist groups and
incapable of achieving a comprehensive ceasefire, it should not complain
about punitive Israeli incursions designed to prevent acts of terrorism
against Israeli civilians.

This in turn leads us to one final observation. Beyond the facade of
elections, important as they are, post-Arafat Palestine remains in a
revolutionary situation. The near assassination attempt on Abu Mazen in
Gaza is liable to be a taste of things to come. The situation could
still go horribly wrong.

