The meeting of the Quartet in New York last week dealt with the "plan"
enunciated by United States President George W. Bush in his June 24,
2002 speech. None of the non-American participants hid their objections
to one major element of the speech, namely, President Bush's call for a
new and different Palestinian leadership. Russian Foreign Minister Igor
Ivanov said on returning to Moscow that there was no discussion of
Arafat, but all except the Americans agreed that the Palestinians have
the right to pick their own leaders.

The element of Bush's speech that was apparently discussed at length was
the reform of the Palestinian Authority, a measure believed necessary by
the Europeans who have been financing much of the PA's activities, and
supported by the Palestinians themselves. One issue evidently discussed
in this context is the idea of outside supervision, that is, the
possibility of an international force for the territories. Most of the
European states, as well as United Nations Secretary General Kofi Anan,
have repeatedly proposed the dispatch of some kind of international
contingent, and the Arab states (Egypt, Jordan, Saudi Arabia) whose
representatives met with the Quartet also raised the matter.

Both the proposals to the Quartet by the Arab representatives and an
earlier French proposal link international supervision to the idea of
elections--which are part of the Bush plan. The Americans would be the
first to argue that an election campaign and elections themselves cannot
be held without freedom of movement and freedom of association, nor in
the intimidating presence of an occupation army. It was the presence of
the Red Army (and Tito's own army) that helped impede free elections in
Eastern Europe after WWII--a factor that the United States protested
officially at the time. The reform proposed by Bush would necessitate
the withdrawal of Israeli forces (presumably to the September 28, 2000
positions). Similarly Palestinian election procedures must have
international supervision, as they did in 1996, while there must be some
assurance of security--including a reduction of violence that the
Palestinians themselves would want for the elections. Thus elections,
demanded by the Americans, might be the vehicle for the introduction of
an international contingent, of a size and nature
(civilian/peacekeeping, large/small) to be determined, along with the
length of stay.

In sum: the Quartet, along with the Arab states, may be working toward a
way of reducing the violence and securing an Israeli withdrawal by means
of elections and the international monitoring required to create
conditions for such elections.

According to the Palestinian Authority, elections are going to be held
in the winter (January 2003?). Preparations are in fact already
underway. Ignoring for the moment the relative certainty that Arafat
will be reelected (and not merely as a figurehead), the elections
themselves may offer a means of changing the situation on the ground. If
free, democratic elections are indeed to be held, it is perfectly in
order to demand a withdrawal of Israeli forces from area A, a return to
the September 28, 2000 positions, and freedom of movement for the
population within the West Bank. If these measures cannot be instigated
because of Israeli security concerns, an international force under the
Americans can assume positions throughout the territories. International
observers were present in the 1996 elections to the Palestine Authority;
it may be argued that a far larger observer contingent in the form of an
observer force is necessary today.

Whereas the American plan posits the end of terrorism as a first step
before an Israeli draw-back, a prior Israeli draw-back with
international observers could be the first step and a factor toward
ending the terrorism. Elections cannot be held in the absence of order
and security any more than they can be held in the absence of freedom of
movement and freedom to assemble. It will thus be in the interest of the
Palestinians as well as the Israelis to ensure all of these elements.
Conceivably, such assurances could only come from a third party, namely,
an international observer or monitoring force.

There have been suggestions that such a force become permanent. There is
the possibility that the territories be placed under international
trusteeship or mandate, which would ensure security until a Palestinian
state were to rise. Such a proposal would require a total Israeli
withdrawal from the territories, implying unilateral withdrawal in the
absence of a negotiated settlement. There is some support for this idea
in the Israeli public, even majority support when the matter is posed as
separation from the territories with Israel drawing its own separation
line--irrespective of who or what would police the territories after
Israeli withdrawal.

Support for separation derives from the wish on the part of the public
to be rid of the conflict with the Palestinians (in the belief that a
fence or border would halt terrorism inside Israel) and a belief that
there is no partner for a negotiated settlement, at least at this time.
Unilateral withdrawal, however, namely any form of separation that also
removes the Israel Defense Forces and the settlers, cannot be expected
from the present Israeli government. Given this, a trusteeship or
mandate would appear to be out of the question. A temporary
international force, linked to the elections that the Americans demand,
without evacuation of settlements or total withdrawal of the IDF might
be acceptable (under pressure) to the government of Israel. At the
least, the connection with the American-demanded elections might provide
the leverage needed to gain Israeli agreement.

The temporary nature of the observer force is important, probably
crucial for Israeli agreement, but if such a force coupled with
elections could serve the purpose of reducing or eliminating the
violence, the way would then presumably be cleared for the
implementation of the Mitchell recommendations or some form of
negotiations. Worth a try.

