Q: If Israel had built the fence closer to the green line
from the start, could it have prevented the current proceedings of the
International Court of Justice at The Hague?

A: I think that if we did not put the fence exactly on the green
line the Palestinians would have tried anyhow.

Q: Will the Palestinian suicide bus bombing of February 22,
2004 in Jerusalem affect The Hague proceedings?

A: That terrorist act has put the proceedings in The Hague into
the proper context from the Israeli point of view. What we want is to
prevent terrorism and what happened in Jerusalem proves that if there is
no fence, there is terror.

Q: Israel is moving the fence toward the green line
precisely when the court is meeting. Doesn't this signal that Israel
somehow recognizes the court's jurisdiction?

A: There was a lively discussion in the government on this
subject. The minister of defense said that the timing was coincidental
and not connected to The Hague. But this doesn't tell the entire story.
When the proceedings at The Hague have concluded, I may voice some
opinions differing from those of the government with regard to the path
of the fence, in order to reduce disturbance to civilian life. But in
principle we have the right to put the fence wherever our lives are in
danger.

Q: Do you believe the cases currently pending before the
Israel High Court of Justice regarding the fence could affect The Hague
court decision?

A: They certainly will affect the decisions of the Israeli
government. We reject the jurisdiction of The Hague court but accept
what our own court says.

Q: Israel decided not to appear at the hearing in The
Hague. Yet the government of Israel has encouraged the Jewish Agency and
various NGOs to demonstrate.

A: I believe we should reject the jurisdiction of the court, but
that if it doesn't accept our view we should appear. But the Cabinet
decided against my view. As for the demonstrations in The Hague, we
learned the lessons of [the anti-racism conference in] Durban, where the
pro-Palestinian forces took over the street.

Q: What is Israel's best-case outcome at The Hague?
Worst-case outcome?

A: The best case would be that the court says it has no
jurisdiction on such a political subject. The worst case is a negative
opinion to the United Nations

