The course of the Middle East conflict usually defies prediction, but
for those who dare, there is one guiding principle that has been passed
on from senior to junior diplomats and journalists. This conventional
wisdom goes that the best way to accurately predict what will happen
next is to remain pessimistic.

For Palestinians, the problem with predictions is that so much of the
future depends on external factors. As a result, we are now in a sort of
waiting mode: waiting for a possible war in Iraq, with all its expected
regional consequences, and waiting for the result of the Israeli
elections, which will determine whether the Israeli people have chosen
to extend the current confrontations and violence by electing the same
sort of people now in power in Israel, or to bring in leaders of the
kind that can once again participate in a peace process.

Indeed, as the weaker party the only thing that the Palestinians are
able to contribute to determining the future is to respond peacefully if
there is a peaceful offer from Israel. (Conversely, they will continue
to respond violently if there is a continuity of the violence of the
Israeli occupation.)

The role of third parties is not very encouraging. Examining the only
game in town, the road map presented last week in Washington by the
United States government to the Quartet leaves the impression that this
is not a serious plan. Its recent formulation is not workable in that it
adopts the Israeli understanding of the situation, especially in
demanding two prerequisites to Israel's ending the occupation:
"successful, significant reforms" and a "successful and complete" end to
Palestinian violence. This once again introduces the practical problem
of confusing cause and effect; how are Palestinians expected to proceed
with "significant reforms" when the violent Israeli occupation continues
and intensifies?

The Quartet might have approached the conflict in a more balanced way by
calling for mutual and reciprocal moves from both sides that would
ensure ending the violence and the causes of the violence
simultaneously. For one, the internal dialogue between Palestinians
currently taking place under the auspices of the Egyptian government is
expected to wrap up a Palestinian consensus over offering a mutual and
reciprocal ceasefire, but very few expect Israel to "accept" to
participate. As such, the scenarios expected to follow the war in Iraq
and the predicted results of the Israeli elections are likely to be no
different than those before us today.

There is hope for the longer term, however. While the Israeli elections
might not bring about a different government, they do have the power to
create a political opposition that will offer the Israeli public an
alternative, unlike the seemingly unanimous Israeli politics during the
previous coalition government. Secondly, the involvement in the Quartet
of other countries and bodies besides the United States should have a
positive long-term effect on the sponsorship of the peace process. The
preliminary signs of that transformation could be seen in the healthy
discussions and differences that have been aired (and should continue)
between the United States and Europe, the United Nations and Russia in
the process of drafting the road map.

