Dear Members of the Quartet,

Your reconvening on the occasion of the World Economic Forum in Jordan
was an encouraging signal from a Palestinian point of view. It comes at
a time that the United States has brought Palestinians and Israelis back
into contact with one another. The resumption of your activities is
especially important now, because renewed US efforts have also returned
us to the United States? monopoly of the peace process, which has
previously allowed Israel to avoid its obligations to signed agreements,
international law and relevant United Nations resolutions. The United
States acting alone is not as sensitive to international law, whereas
members of the Quartet are bound by that law as representatives of the
spirit and will of the international community.

At this point, the recent US-led efforts have made apparent several
shortcomings of which the Quartet must be made aware. Some of these
shortcomings are reminiscent of previous failed attempts to bring the
parties to negotiations, including the efforts of US officials Anthony
Zinni and George Tenet. The most important of these shortcomings
circumvents the fact that the roadmap
                                                 is one integral
document that deals in the immediate term with the dire need to
stabilize the situation in a balanced and reciprocal manner, while
placing this stabilization package in the context of a process with very
clear political dimensions, i.e. the intention to fulfill the legitimate
rights of Palestinians by ending the occupation and meet the legitimate
rights of Israelis by offering peace, security and integration. What
Israel is trying to finagle--with the American administration doing
nothing to prevent it--is a bid to isolate the security components of
this roadmap from other elements, working them out separately from the
roadmap context.

The roadmap and its stabilization package call for Palestinians to end
all kinds of violence against Israelis wherever they may be, while
Israel--bound by the very same language--is to end all kinds of violence
against Palestinians wherever they may be. The roadmap does not
differentiate between the violence felt by Palestinian or Israeli
civilians. This same stabilization package expects Israel to end
restrictions on Palestinian movement and stop settlement expansion,
while Palestinians reform their authority and security in order to
prevent other groups from possessing arms and militias, and to end
incitement and begin reconciliation.

It cannot have escaped you that Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, who
was dragged to accept the roadmap against his will, weighted his
"acceptance"                                                        with
14 reservations, avoided any statement in Aqaba
                                                    that would ensure
Israeli implementation and then pointedly resumed Israel's policy of
assassinating Palestinians just 48 hours later. On the very day of the
Quartet's meeting in Jordan, Sharon told his cabinet that settlement
activity can continue.

The spirit of the roadmap calls for a halt in violence from both sides
and acting to end the Israeli occupation. The one-sided language coming,
especially from the Americans, but sometimes from others, that sees only
the violence of Palestinians and is blind to both Israel's violence or
the fact that this violence occurs in the context of the illegal
military occupation is not constructive. Indeed, it encourages Sharon to
continue the occupation, which instigates violent reactions from the
people who are occupied. Military occupation is the source of all kinds
of violence that Palestinians feel nearly any time they come in contact
with the occupying authorities--abuse at checkpoints, refusal to travel
for unstated reasons, the sweeping confiscation of land, arbitrary
demolition of homes and property, random arrests and political
detention. Whenever violence is condemned, you must also condemn the
occupation, otherwise we will be aimlessly treating the symptoms of the
problem, rather than healing this devastating disease.

