Palestinians were not excited this way or that at the news of the Likud
vote against a possible Israeli national unity government, simply
because the experience of the previous Likud-Labor government did not
bring about any deviation from Likud's policies and practices toward peace.

On the contrary, the inclusion of Labor, especially Shimon Peres, with
his positive international image, merely managed to cover up many of
that government's violations of international law and of several peace
initiatives and efforts.

Some would argue that the importance of the vote for Palestinians lies
in the effect the vote may have on any possible Israeli withdrawal from
the Gaza Strip. But also in this regard, the vote did not stir
Palestinian passions.

Palestinians were not enamored of Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's
unilateral withdrawal plan in the first place. In fact, what
Palestinians have seen and learned about this plan so far makes it look
disastrous from a Palestinian perspective. While it includes a certain
withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, it also involves the consolidation of
the occupation of the West Bank, the largest Palestinian territory.

That's apparent not only in explicit statements such as that of Israeli
Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz that there will be more settlements in the
West Bank, but also in actual new settlement expansion plans, as
asserted in Sharon's recent declaration that over 1,000 new apartments
are to be built in West Bank settlements, and the week before, the
announcement that 700 new apartments are to be built in the Maale
Admumim settlement east of Jerusalem alone.

In addition, the scope of any Gaza withdrawal is not at all clear. What
Palestinians have understood about the nature of that withdrawal is that
it is an evacuation that will exclude "certain military locations." The
Gaza withdrawal does not hold out any promise of an end to Israeli
control over the Strip, and, as a consequence, to the Israeli siege
imposed there. Any positives to Gaza of such a withdrawal are thus
immediately negated by the continuation of the factors that impose such
burdens on life there.

It's useful here to remember the statement by World Bank head James
Wolfensohn and the report of the World Bank itself on this unilateral
Israeli plan. It was the opinion of both the institution and its head
that any withdrawal without free access to and from Gaza will keep in
place the present disastrous economic situation there.

Thus, the creation, or the failure to create, an Israeli national unity
government that will only provide cover for Sharon's plans to
unilaterally impose a settlement on the Palestinian side is neither here
nor there. What Palestinians want to see, and what is needed for any
hope for peace to be created, are efforts, in Israel, to bring about a
majority commitment to peace based on international legality.

Palestinians, in other words, want to see an Israeli government, of
whatever color, that is committed to negotiations as a means to bring
about a solution based on international law. Both sides have legitimate
rights, and both sides must have a say in how their legitimate rights
are obtained. Any unilateral act, especially unilateral acts that only
deepen violations of international law, serves only to destroy
confidence and pushes back the date when we will finally arrive at a
true and mutually beneficial peace.

