Q: How will a war in Iraq affect the elections in Israel?

A: Voters will go to the polls thinking about the Iraqi issue and
relations with the US. The closer we are to war, the more
security-minded the atmosphere will be.

Q: What sort of governmental coalition would you like to see
after the elections?

A: A coalition with three goals: it will agree to enter negotiations
with the Palestinians immediately; it will agree to a Palestinian state;
and it will agree to change the electoral system by raising the
threshold for entering the Knesset. It will be centrist, built around
the two big parties, otherwise it won't have a majority. And it won't be
dependent on the religious parties and the settlers. It will separate
religion from politics. The alternative is a right wing coalition that's
dependent on the settlers.

Q: You are in effect pointing to the centrality of the
settlements. What is your solution for them following elections?

A: Comprehensive dismantling of settlements only in the Gaza Strip.
Everywhere else it's complicated, and I suggest three principles:
removing isolated settlements; concentrating settlements in the
settlement blocs, including land swaps with the Palestinians; and anyone
who does not wish to leave a settlement or move to a bloc, will be
permitted to remain under Palestinian rule, with Israel ensuring their
safety.

Q: Will the conquest of Iraq by the United States bring about
realization of your vision of a New Middle East?

A: After World War II, the central problem was communism. Today it's
terrorism. The distinction favors communism, because it was never as
aggressive as terrorism. It's not that America is attacking terrorism;
terrorism attacked America. This is not a war in the sense of army vs.
army, but rather of organizing against terrorism. It is Iraq's proximity
to nuclear weaponry that put it at the head of the list of objectives.

The question is whether the US will do the job alone or in harmony. I
don't see a possibility of American failure in Iraq; the US is on the
defensive and has no alternative. The discussion is whether the
international reaction should only involve the war on terrorism, or the
denial of infrastructure to terrorism as well. You can't eliminate
terrorism without eliminating the infrastructure.

Q: As you understand the Americans, this is what they intend
to do?

A: Not really, but I think they'll get to it, and that the conquest
of Iraq will really create a New Middle East. Put differently: the
Middle East will enter a new age. For the time being this will happen
without us, as long as there's no Palestinian solution.

Many peoples in the region are ruled by frightened dictators who have to
decide whom to fear more, the terrorists or the war against terrorism.
Asad fears for his legitimacy due to the war against terrorism. Arafat
can also lose his legitimacy. The Saudis gave money for terrorism due to
fear. No terrorist-sponsoring country is democratic. I don't believe in
Huntington's clash of civilizations; within every civilization there's a
clash. In those countries [that support terrorism] there will be
revolutions. Television will play a role like in the collapse of the
Iron Curtain. This will happen with the Palestinians, too. The Arab
world is ripe for internal revolution like the USSR and China in the
past decade.

Q: What will happen to the peace process in the post-war
circumstances you have described?

A: There will be three actors: us, the Palestinians and the Quartet.
We won't be able to play the powers off against one another any more.
After Iraq the Americans have no alternative but to cooperate with the
Quartet. Two things happened here. On the positive side, the nature of
the solution is more or less known. On the negative, trust has
disappeared. This brings us to the Quartet's task. Unlike others, I
don't think the Quartet should send the military here, but rather should
grant financial assistance and legitimize a different Palestinian regime
in which Arafat can remain if he's not the ultimate arbiter. [Prime
Minister Ariel] Sharon's decision to accept the Bush Plan will backfire
on him. If Arik doesn't see the realities he won't remain prime minister.

Q: You are as optimistic as ever.

A: Look, there are no national strategies any longer. There's only
national poverty. With the global economy there are only global
strategies. We're moving from a world of enemies that are national to a
world of global dangers. Can you place boundaries on pollution? We in
Israel are also living in the past. In 1965 I came out with the slogan
"scientification of the country." They laughed at me: "That Peres with
his dreams again." And look at us today. . .

