Not only is the roadmap                                                 
teetering on the edge of death, but the Quartet that was created to
promote this latest Arab-Israeli peace effort is also close to
disintegration. Instead of the promised harmony, the members continue
their solo performances and each seeks the spotlight. While European
officials are making pilgrimages to Yasir Arafat's headquarters in
Ramallah, United States officials meet Palestinian Prime Minister
Mahmoud Abbas in Jericho. And the faces of European Union leaders such
as Javier Solana and George Papandreou, as well as perennial United
Nations representative Terje Roed-Larsen, were all missing from the
group photos of the Sharm al-Sheikh and Aqaba summits. Like Arafat, the
Quartet watched the show, conducted by President Bush, on television.

Indeed the Quartet, like the roadmap, had a very inauspicious debut,
demonstrating that the core issues that contributed to the catastrophic
end of Oslo have not been resolved. During the Oslo phase, often
competing policies of the US and Europe caused confusion and allowed the
main actors to seek better terms by shuffling between the two main
mediators. Now, amidst the deep fractures between the US and "Old"
Europe over Iraq, and Israeli anger over European paternalism and
betrayal of democratic principles (amplified in the UN), the prospects
of a useful role for the Quartet are essentially zero.

The violence that followed the introduction of the roadmap was, in part,
the result of the flawed Quartet framework. British Prime Minister Tony
Blair's determination to publish the text immediately after the defeat
of Saddam Hussein prevented Mahmoud Abbas from wresting control over the
security apparatus from Arafat. Blair felt he needed a quick release in
order to appease constituencies angered by the British position on the
Iraq war. This gave Arafat enough power to sabotage Israeli-Palestinian
security coordination, and, according to reports, to dispatch terrorists
from his muqata'a headquarters.

At the same time, the premature presentation of this initiative ensured
that Abbas would remain weak. The various factions, including Hamas,
were thus invited to try their luck in destabilizing the new Palestinian
government and the roadmap process. The results included the murder of
four soldiers guarding the highly symbolic Erez crossing (where
Palestinians enter Israel to work), followed by an Israeli targeted
attack against a Hamas leader, and then the very brutal bus bombing in
Jerusalem. Together, these initial but readily predictable failures may
be fatal for the roadmap.

In terms of meeting the difficult challenges of implementing the roadmap
on the ground, the EU appears to have little to offer. European leaders,
as well as UN Secretary General Kofi Annan, again denounced the terror
attacks by Hamas, and issued more ritual calls to end the violence, as
if such statements had any impact whatsoever. In contrast, President
Bush increased the level of his direct involvement, reversing his
initial stand and accepting Israeli actions to end terrorism conducted
by Hamas. The US also threatened to take action against countries that
provide assistance to terror groups, while the EU could only hint in the
vaguest terms regarding possible sanctions against Hamas. And as the
Americans belatedly dispatched the initial monitoring group, and forced
resumption of the Israeli and Palestinian security talks in a desperate
hope to save the roadmap, Europe and the UN remained on the sidelines,
without influence on such critical steps.

From an Israeli perspective, the main rationale for the Quartet is to
keep the other three actors from interfering with the policies pursued
by the Americans. The Israeli view of the EU has become increasingly
bitter, based on the European adoption of the Palestinian narrative,
focusing on "settlement, occupation and victimization" (as if the
conflict began in 1967). Europeans and the UN are seen to pander to
growing Muslim populations and oil dependency, at Israel's expense.
Anti-Semitism and paternalism (particularly from the French) still play
a role and, in contrast to the US, Europe puts little emphasis on norms
such as democracy and freedom. In the entire Oslo period and well
beyond, the EU never halted the flow of funds to the Palestinian
Authority despite its corruption and direct involvement in terror, and
the investigation demanded by the EU's parliament is being conducted in
secret. And finally, Israelis realize that while the other members of
the Quartet will advocate "painful concessions" and risk-taking for
Israel, only the US will assist Israel if and when such policies go
badly wrong.

These problems were reflected in the first disastrous days of the
roadmap's life. It is now clear that only the full force of "Pax
Americana", without petty political competition from its "partners", may
be able to create some stability. Perhaps by banging enough heads
together, the Americans may force the disarming of Hamas and force the
PA to ensure that it has a monopoly on the use of force, as necessary
for any proto-state. If they succeed, this could also set the stage for
beginning the deep changes necessary for transforming the conflict. For
their part, the other three members of the Quartet need to examine their
roles and past failures more critically, while avoiding contributing to
the failure of another peace process, and to more violence and murder.

