The Palestinian presentation at The International Court of Justice in
The Hague is the first move in a tense game of international chess. With
the battle being fought in the court itself and on the playing field of
public opinion, it is imperative that we keep a focus on a few things.
When the United Nations General Assembly asked the court to provide an
advisory opinion on the legality of the route of Israel's wall, it
clearly marked the beginning of the vindication of the Palestinian
position which is in step with international legitimacy and law. The
Israeli refusal to accept the jurisdiction of the court reinforces what
the Palestinians have been saying all along. In order to understand that
the hearings in The Hague, we must put the whole discussion in perspective.

>From the Palestinian point of view, the separation wall is very clearly
seen as part and parcel of the Israeli policy of settlement expansion.
The path in which the wall is being built is not dictated by Israel's
security needs, but the needs of the settlements in the occupied
Palestinian territories. The other purpose is to squeeze the maximum
number of Palestinians into crowded cantons or enclaves in order to
create a "green field" for the expansion of the settlements, hence, the
expansion of Israel in the occupied territories.

Second of all, the separation wall project is a blatant attempt by the
Israeli government to prejudice the outcome of any meaningful
negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians in the future. It is
designed to preempt the vital need to create a viable, contiguous, and
democratic Palestinian state in the occupied territories based on
international legality (the June 1967 borders).

Thirdly, it is also aimed at destroying the already-limping Palestinian
economy. By suffocating any movement of people and goods, the Israelis
are finishing off any rays of economic hope. Looking at the 2003 fourth
quarter statistics (the last available from the Palestinian Bureau of
Statistics), it becomes clear that the economic situation in the Jenin,
Tulkarem, and Qalqilia areas has deteriorated dramatically since the
completion of the wall in those regions. The wall has eaten up large
swaths of land designated for agriculture and prevented people from
farming or tending their lands. It has also had a drastic negative
effect on employment in an area which already has suffered a great deal
over the past three years due to Israeli-imposed restrictions. Just when
we thought the occupation authority's draconian measures couldn't get
worse, the wall came up. Poverty in these areas has worsened to a great
extent, providing ample fodder for extremist elements in Palestinian
society.

The paean that the separation wall provides security for Israel and
Israelis is completely false. Real security can only be achieved through
the peaceful relations of neighbors. By insisting on erecting a wall
which severely adds to the suffering of the Palestinian civilian
population, Israel is actively creating desperation and despair among
the Palestinians. Israel's security would have been better served if it
had invested those hundreds of millions of dollars into building bridges
of cooperation instead of walls of separation.

We look at the proceedings in The Hague anxiously, hoping that an
advisory opinion based on international law will be the first step
towards bringing down this monstrosity. If the international community's
member states adhere to the findings of the court, we can only hope that
they will take the side of legality and implement the court's advice. It
will be a sunny day when the US president or the leader of a European
country takes the example of the Berlin Wall and paraphrases former US
President Ronald Reagan shouting, "Mr. Sharon, tear this wall down!"

