In most cases, wars and violent conflicts result in a political
settlement. But it is not at all certain that after more than 50 years
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is approaching this stage. Many in the
West and in Israel are accustomed to thinking in "can do" terms of
finding solutions to problems. Liberals in particular argue that with
good will and intense intellectual effort, it is possible to find the
magic formula that will satisfy the conflicted parties and lead to
peaceful coexistence. Yet reality sometimes places us in situations for
which there is no satisfactory solution, either in the short or the long
term. In these instances the parties involved continue to struggle until
one of them is defeated, or fatigue leads to temporary quiet or even
produces an end of conflict.

Yet even if Israelis and Palestinians have indeed reached a stage of
societal fatigue that generates the kind of reformulation of national
goals that might enable a compromise, the violent struggle and its
consequences will certainly exercise decisive influence over the outline
of a future settlement and the agenda leading up to it.

The bitter truth is that the use of force has an educational dimension,
insofar as it can cause suffering. There are societies whose learning
process requires the use of force. The author of Proverbs wrote 3,000
years ago "spare the rod and spoil the child."

Moreover, the Middle East is a part of the world where all actors employ
various degrees of military force to attain their political objectives.
The use of force is part and parcel of the international rules of the
game. Indeed, ours is one of the most heavily armed regions in the
world, where no state, and certainly not Yasir Arafat, is prepared to
concede the need to establish and maintain an army. Notably, all the
regional elites gauge the military might of their neighbors in analyzing
their international relations, except a few naive individuals on the
Israeli left. Ehud Barak was right when he remarked that in the Middle
East the weak do not get a second chance. Lebanon was conquered by force
by the Syrians, South Yemen was "united" by force with its sister in the
north, and only American military intervention saved Kuwait from a
similar fate. Any attempt to argue that military force does not play an
important role in the Middle East ignores both international reality and
practice.

This is certainly true of the Israel-Arab case, where the two sides are
waging an extended violent struggle over the same parcel of land. True,
the Zionist movement has demonstrated a realistic political approach,
and throughout most of its history displayed a far-reaching readiness to
compromise and accept the principle of partitioning the Land of Israel.
Yet most Jews finally abandoned the concept of the Greater Land of
Israel only after the first Intifada broke out in 1987. It was only
following a violent struggle with the Palestinians that Israeli society
concluded that the cost of maintaining an Israeli presence throughout
the entire homeland was too great. The result was a more active search
than in previous years for a possible Palestinian partner.

The evolution of the Palestinian movement from the call to destroy
Israel to the advocacy in 1988 of a solution based on two states for two
peoples, is the result of its realistic recognition that Israel is too
strong, and that any attempt to uproot it in the near future will not
succeed. The failure of the first Intifada (1987-1990) to push Israel
out of Judea, Samaria and Gaza was undoubtedly one of the root causes of
the Palestine Liberation Organization's (PLO's) resort to a political
track. Further, the expansion of Jewish settlement throughout the Land
of Israel created new faits accomplis under Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
auspices that were decidedly inconvenient for Palestinians and
constituted a significant catalyst toward their agreement to negotiate.
The PLO came to the negotiating table at Oslo due to its weakness, not
because of a genuine longing for peace.

Israel of course recognizes that there are political and moral
constraints upon the use of force. This is why it is difficult for
Israel to translate its technological, economic and military advantage
into an immediate decisive military victory. But Israel enjoys
sufficient strength to prevent Palestinian military achievements. Since
September 2000 it has done so with the broad backing of the Jewish
public in Israel. Moreover, Israel's military capacity to cause the
Palestinians pain and suffering in a selective way remains an important
factor in moderating their demands.

Operation Defensive Shield demonstrated a sample of the destructive
consequences of ongoing Palestinian terrorism and provocations directed
at the IDF. The continued terrorism carried out by the extreme members
of Palestinian society hinders the attempt by a variety of observers to
assess the tremendous impact that Israeli forces left in Palestinian
cities. Thus Israeli strength is a vital condition for altering
Palestinian consciousness as to what is possible in terms of a
settlement with the Jewish state, and for directing Palestinian energies
back to the negotiating table on conditions congenial to Israel.

Still, only an educational process lasting several generations will
soften Palestinians' hatred for Jews and render their leaders more
realistic. There is no chance that such a process will be fulfilled
without significant Israeli military power.

