Q: What do you think the incursions and demolitions in
Rafah have to do with Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's plan to
withdraw from Gaza, if anything?

A: I think that Sharon has distinguished himself in being
very, very brutal and inconsiderate of human rights principles. What is
happening in Rafah is only in line with his general performance.

Q: As a veteran advocate for the Palestinian cause, what
are your observations about what is happening in Rafah?

A: Our position is very clear. We have adopted a
conciliatory position by asking for a Palestinian state on one-fourth of
historic Palestine. Still, this is opposed and not respected by the
Israeli side. You can imagine how one might describe this Israeli position.

I know that Zionism claimed all of Palestine, but I think that it is
high time that Palestinian rights in Palestine are recognized. Our
conciliatory position is proof that we are sincere in [attempts] to
realize a needed peace between the two communities. This is being
neglected and Sharon is having his way in brutalizing the Palestinian
people in the hope that they will succumb and abandon their rights.

I know that our performance is not very organized. I know that we commit
mistakes. I don't agree with suicide actions on our part, but Israel is
doing something similar with its aerial bombardments. They target one
person, and then kill several people standing beside him. This is just
as bad as the suicide acts committed by the Islamists.

Israel's performance is far from showing commitment to peace principles,
to international principles, and it is high time that the objective of
peace is given more consideration and more sincerity.

Q: Have you given up hope on the intervention of the
international community?

A: No. I am sorry that the international community is
adopting a very passive ineffectual position, but still I hope that it
will wake up to its responsibilities and not just stand by and watch.

Q: What can you say about the relationship between United
States President George W. Bush and Sharon and its impact on the conflict?

A: I am very unhappy with the Bush performance. I don't know
how informed he is about the [Palestinian] problem and its historic
background. It seems to me that Bush's actions do not indicate that he
is very well informed about the realities of the problem. He is very
involved in his career and his future. Certainly, this has terrible
repercussions.

Q: Do you see a way in which Palestinians can make the best
of this situation?

A: I think there is much that can be done. The Palestinians
have been acting without even the slightest organization. One of the
weaknesses of Palestinians is that they are very emotional, and this at
times works against their interests. We have to be more organized, less
emotional and really see things objectively--and act objectively. Much
of what we do deprives us of the support of the international community.
We have been suffering such terrible injustice, and our performance
deprives us of the needed sympathy.

Q: Did anything surprise you about what happened in Rafah?

A: I would be the first to admit that we often do things
that we should not do. We commit mistakes. But exploiting that, as
Sharon is doing, is brutal.

