This Israeli Likud government led by the right-wing extremist Ariel
Sharon has two identifying characteristics: strategic political
objectives based on ideological/religious belief and claims of a
2,000-year-long Jewish presence in Palestine; and the use of force to
achieve those ideological objectives.

Palestine, too, has its own political strains opposing the historic
compromise between Israelis and Palestinians on the basis of two states
for two peoples along the 1967 borders. These Palestinians also believe
in the use of force as a means for achieving their ideological objectives.

The difference between the two, however, is that in Israel this tendency
has been in power since the 2001 election of the right-wing Likud. In
Palestine, this tendency is a minority in the opposition. A second
difference is that the Israeli use of force seeks to maintain and
consolidate an illegal occupation, while in Palestine the use of force
is advocated to end that belligerent military occupation. Both camps
oppose the peace process, however, and in that sense, each tendency's
use of force has been reinforcing that of the other.

When the Israeli people democratically elected Ariel Sharon and the
Likud government, they transmitted a very significant message to the
Palestinian people, a message much stronger than any subsequent
statement from those same elected officials or the joining of the
leftist Labor party with that government or even the conciliatory
comments by some international leaders, including Arabs, that this
government "deserves a chance." The message of the Israeli public was
that it is not prepared for the kind of peace commenced in this peace
process, i.e., a complete end to the Israeli occupation according to
United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 and a just solution for
the Palestinian refugee problem based on UN Resolution 194.

That election also sent the message that Israel was ready to resort to
any means to prevent the fulfillment of the peace process underway. It
could only be expected that this use of violence would reinforce the
parallel mentality on the Palestinian side.

It is important here not to be deceived by Israeli propaganda and
confuse cause with effect. It was the collapse of the peace process and
the change in Israeli government and subsequent use of violence that is
responsible for Palestinian violent attacks. First, Palestinians
remained committed to the peace process even after the 2000 Camp David
summit. Their perception was that Camp David was a success as the two
parties' first attempt at tackling final status issues, and that those
efforts could be continued from where they left off. Palestinians were
very open to the follow-up meetings at Taba and repeatedly point to the
significant process made in those talks over crucial sticking points.
Both the Palestinian Authority and Israeli Labor Party negotiators
admitted then and continue to say today that significant additional
progress was made at the Taba talks.

The turning point, then, was not some decision on the part of
Palestinians to opt out of peace, as Israeli propaganda would have one
believe, but the Labor Party's election defeat to a party and leader at
the forefront of opposition to the peace process. Sharon's prior visit
to the Aqsa Mosque, and the lethal force Israel used on unarmed
protesters, killing an average of ten Palestinians a day in the first
ten days of the uprising, was the spark for the intense violence we
witness today. For the first six months of the intifada, Israel
viciously killed Palestinians with impunity and it was only after this
period that Palestinian Islamic groups resumed regular attacks against
Israelis inside Israel.

Within Palestine, there has recently been a great deal of debate over
Palestinian attacks causing Israeli civilian casualties inside Israel.
The growing opposition to these activities has two explanations. First,
these attacks target Israeli civilians at a time when Palestinians are
objecting to the great number of Palestinian civilian casualties-- four
times the number of Israeli civilians killed--at the hands of the
Israeli military. Second, these acts do not match the political program
of the Palestinian people to end the Israeli occupation in the West Bank
and Gaza, because they extend beyond the occupied territories. The
problem is that the continuation of Israel's reoccupation, curfews,
restrictions on movement and killing, especially the killing of
Palestinian civilians, all weaken the arguments against suicide bombings
and strengthen the call for revenge in kind.

Ultimately, without strong external interference against the use of
force against civilians of the two sides by the two sides, there is no
foreseeable way out.

