It is easy to conclude that neither Palestinians nor Israelis would
choose the green line as their reference point, if offered the
opportunity. Palestinians have rights to historic Palestine both east
and west of the green line that no one can deny. Israelis, too, did not
select this line, and if the choice was left to either side, a great
majority from both publics would probably like to move the border a bit
to the west, or a bit to the east.

But an international consensus has settled on this line as the
demarcation for a two state solution. The outside world has accepted
these borders and they have become part of the internationally
sanctioned solution for this conflict. When the Israeli army exceeded
those borders to the east during the War of 1967, the international
community made itself heard in the form of United Nations Resolution
242, which considers the Israeli occupation to be an illegal occupation
and reiterates the inadmissibility of acquiring land by force. This
renders the Israeli acquisition of lands beyond the borders of 1967
explicitly illegal.

Opening this subject, i.e. that of the green line, for reconsideration
or renegotiation would leave us in a situation whereby each side would
do its utmost to pursue changes in its interest. That will not only make
it extremely difficult to reach an agreement but, from a Palestinian
point of view, will also weaken Resolution 242, which refers to the
borders of 1967 and is crucial to backing up the Palestinian demand for
an end to the Israeli occupation. If the 242 borders, i.e. the green
line, are not the legal reference for talks, then negotiations over the
borders between the two parties will lie at the mercy of the balance of
powers, which definitely does not favor Palestinians.

For that reason, the Palestinian negotiating position has been and will
remain defensive concerning this legal point: any flexibility over that
principle, regardless of the minute amounts of land Palestinians are
asked to give up, will certainly weaken the Palestinian position and
remove a major defense mechanism that will ultimately lead to the
collapse of the Palestinian political negotiations strategy.

In underscoring this point, it is worth noting the further flexibility
shown at Camp David when, in an attempt to accommodate the reality but
maintain the principle, the Palestinian leadership accepted to swap land
inside the occupied territories for the same percentage of land in what
is now Israel--under the condition, of course, that the swap be equal in
quality and quantity.

For these reasons, all involved should be put on notice that
Palestinians, who have already given up basic rights in property and
land to the west of the green line, cannot afford any compromise on the
borders of the green line. They have already made their historic
compromise for the negotiations process. If they were to allow
negotiations on the 1967 borders, they would be compromising the
compromise and open the door to endless blackmailing and exploitation of
the imbalance of powers. We cannot afford this.

The success of Palestinian adherence to this principle based on
international legality can be seen in the worldwide acceptance for the
concept of two states, represented in the June 24 speech of United
States President George W. Bush, in which he stated that Israel should
withdraw from the territories occupied in 1967. That speech then formed
the basis of the internationally-supported roadmap plan to return
Palestinians and Israelis to talks.

