There are three different possible reasons for this dramatic,
unprecedented and unprovoked escalation in Gaza, which began in Zeitun
neighborhood in Gaza City and continued in Rafah.

The first and most important is internal Israeli politics. Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon recently experienced two defeats that affected his
political standing. The first was the defeat of his "unilateral
disengagement" proposal in the Likud party referendum. The second defeat
was the success of the Palestinian resistance in Zeitun and later in
Rafah in blowing up two military armored vehicles and killing 11 Israeli
soldiers. Those attacks were a political blow to Sharon since he had
been trying to pass off the impression that a string of high-level
assassinations in Gaza were successful in overcoming the Palestinian
resistance. Further, the attacks were carried out in the occupied
territories and against soldiers, not civilians, meaning that Israel was
not afforded the usual sympathy--and matching criticism of
Palestinians--it receives after attacks on civilians.

A second reason for this escalation is simply the reigning spirit of
revenge. These incursions were marked by their brutality and savagery,
out of proportion to their supposed military aims. Most of the 50 people
killed over these three days were unarmed civilians, and an inordinate
number of them were children. The destruction to infrastructure appears
to have been unnecessary, and included the complete debilitation of the
power and water networks in the area. Eyewitness accounts tell of the
random demolition of groups of homes far from the border that Israel
keeps telling us it is trying to protect.

The third possible explanation for this escalation is the laying of the
groundwork for the possible implementation of "version two" of Sharon's
plan, which includes working out multilateral arrangements on the
Egyptian-Palestinian border. In sum, however, this "preparation" is
simply part of an ongoing Sharon strategy of using the Israeli military
and resorting to force and violence to terrorize the Palestinian people
and leadership. Really, what this Israeli government is trying to do is
to wreck the morale of the Palestinian people in such a way that it is
able to impose the kind of political solution that Israel wants and
Palestinians do not.

The conclusion that can be drawn from this bloody week in Gaza, whether
we are talking about the Israeli incursions, demolitions of homes and
killing of innocents, or the Palestinian attack on Israeli soldiers
there, is that peace and security cannot be achieved by violence and
force. Pressure will only produce explosions. Peace, security and a
political solution based in dignity can only be achieved if the two
sides accept to replace the strategy of violence with peaceful
negotiations that are based on international law, rather than on
exploitation of the balance of power.

