Palestinians and their supporters often cite South African apartheid
when trying to illustrate the conditions the Palestinian people are
living under. The wall that is being built up and down occupied
Palestinian territory is thus known as the apartheid wall, and, just
recently, President Yasser Arafat invoked South Africa when, in an
interview with the London-based al Sharq al Awsat newspaper, he said he
would be happy to do as Nelson Mandela did and step aside for a new
generation of leaders, but only, as in the case of South Africa, when
nationhood is achieved.

Indeed, the South African apartheid system does exhibit a number of
similarities to the system installed by the Israeli government to rule
Palestinians under occupation. To give but one, perhaps the most obvious
example, Palestinians in the occupied territories live under one law,
military law, while Israeli settlers in the same occupied territories
live under another, civil Israeli law.

Since 1948, Israel has been using what are known as emergency
regulations that were originally devised by the British Mandate
authorities, ironically, at times to be used by the British against the
Jews. These emergency laws were used for years against the Palestinian
population inside the green line and, since the occupation of the Gaza
Strip, the West Bank and East Jerusalem, are still applied in occupied
Palestinian territory.

The rules give all legal power to the Israeli military governor
vis-a-vis the occupied Palestinian population under his rule, unlike the
settlers in occupied territory who are subject to Israeli civilian
police. Thus a Palestinian will be put before a military court (if he
goes to court and is not simply placed in administrative detention),
while an Israeli settler will retain his full civil and political rights
before a civil court.

In general, while Israel likes to portray itself as a country ruled by
law, the fact remains that for Palestinians, the Israeli courts are the
chief instruments through which torture and discrimination against them
are institutionalized. And in this vein there are many other instances
of obvious discrimination that are remarkably similar to the apartheid
era (compare settler-only roads to white-only restaurants, or the "right
of return" of Jews who have never been to the country while Palestinian
refugees indigenous to the country linger in exile, etc.).

But there are also important differences. The black South African
struggle was one for equal rights in one country. While some
Palestinians would advocate a similar struggle here, the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict has become primarily one over the creation
of two separate states, or rather a Palestinian state alongside Israel.

And while the struggle against apartheid was a struggle for equal social
and political rights, the Palestinian struggle, in addition to that, is
also an existential struggle. The current Israeli prime minister is the
first ever to publicly state that he would accept a Palestinian state,
but on the ground he is doing his best to ensure that such a thing
cannot become a reality by isolating Palestinians into cantons and
imposing his own vision of what land such a state can be built on.

Finally, the apartheid regime existed while there was still a global
balance of power. Today's unipolar world is held entirely in the sway of
the world's single hegemon, the United States. And the US is Israel's
staunchest supporter. While black South Africans received crucial
solidarity from sectors of American society for whom the civil rights
movement was a defining and greatly empowering phenomenon, no equivalent
exists for the Palestinians.

Herein lies a major problem for Palestinians. While a number of
pressures led to the end of the apartheid regime, a crucial one was the
international isolation and economic sanctions that were eventually
imposed on that country. Palestinians have tried, and continue to try to
convince the international community that a similar course of action
with regards to Israel would be an effective way of finally solving this
conflict. But as long as the US continues successfully to block such
efforts, via its veto power in the United Nations Security Council or
direct pressure on a number of countries--and as the only global power
the US can dictate and determine how political processes unfold--it is
an avenue of pressure that will be closed off to Palestinians.

In short, while both apartheid South Africa and the Israeli occupation
are similar in the desire shown by one people to control the indigenous
other of a given country and the lengths to which they would go to crush
the will of their targeted populations, the Palestinians must also
understand the differences in the two cases to better achieve their
national rights. Thus, while apartheid South Africa might provide a
fairly accurate comparison to illustrate the plight of the Palestinian
people, it does not necessarily provide the model upon which action
should be emulated. Palestinians need to be creative to fight for their
rights in the context of the particularities of their situation, which
in certain crucial aspects are different from apartheid.

