The obvious parallels between the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and
apartheid in South Africa do not necessarily lead one to the conclusion
that the solution that succeeded there is applicable here.

Israeli practices in the occupied Palestinian territories are creating
an apartheid situation whereby two communities living in the same
territory do so under two completely different sets of regulated
circumstances; answering to two different legal systems, driving on two
separate road networks and working under different economic situations,
etc. These different sets of laws are clear evidence of discrimination
by the occupying forces that represent the settler minority and are
causing a huge gap in the standard of living between the two peoples.

And as with the apartheid regime in South Africa, Israel is also in
clear contravention of international law, the resolutions of the United
Nations and the majority opinion of the international community
vis-a-vis the conflict. It is obvious that the majority of world public
opinion is in favor of the applicability of international law and thus
clearly against the illegal occupation and its resulting apartheid
practices.

One significant difference in this regard, however, is the difficulty in
translating world public opinion into official positions of governments,
especially influential ones. The main reason is that one of the two
parties in the conflict, namely Israel, has two sources of influence on
foreign governments. One is the strategic role Israel is playing in the
region, which serves strategic interests of international powers such as
the United States.

The second is the existence of pro-Israel lobbies powerful enough, both
economically and politically, to be able to influence the positions and
behaviors of other governments on the conflict, in particular the US.
There, the influence of these lobby groups makes itself felt
particularly in the Congress and Senate where representatives know their
voting patterns vis-a-vis the conflict can influence the extent to which
they receive funding for future election campaigns.

It took years of bloodshed and miserable racial discrimination, but
fortunately, in South Africa they eventually managed to find a solution
based on the fundamental principle of democracy, namely the one-man,
one-vote system. In our case, such a solution, though attractive to
Palestinians, has little practical chance of implementation. That's why
the only way out seems to be by dividing the land between the two
peoples in accordance with the relevant UN Security Council resolutions,
some of which determine the principle--UNSCR 181--and some of which
determine the borders--UNSCR 242.

The most important lessons that can be drawn by Palestinians and
Israelis from the South African situation are three. First, people on
both sides must renounce the use of violence and replace it by a
constructive dialogue and negotiations that have a better chance of
achieving the objective of peaceful co-existence.

Secondly, both parties must also realize they cannot get all that they
want. This is a logical corollary to conducting negotiations in the
spirit of compromise.

Finally, in all things, proper weight must be given to legality, whether
in terms of following or respecting current international law or basing
any future arrangement on new laws that enjoy the respect and the
adherence of both parties.

