The Palestinian account of the rise and fall of the roadmap
                                                 is simple and
straightforward. Israel was first dragged to accept the plan, and then
conditioned its acceptance on 14 reservations
                                                      , and /then/ tried
all tactics possible to escape having to comply with its roadmap
obligations in the first phase. Basically, Israel used the same old
tactic that brought down previous initiatives, including the Mitchell
plan                                                 , Tenet plan
                                              and Zinni ideas
                                             , the tactic of insisting
on isolating the security components of the roadmap's first phase and
making Palestinian compliance with those components a prerequisite for
moving on to Israeli obligations--obligations that were initially
intended to occur simultaneously with Palestinian security commitments.

Despite a significant improvement in the security situation and progress
on the security track, as well as ready Palestinian compliance with
obligations towards reform, Israel refused to even begin talking about
its obligations to stop settlement expansion, dismantle all outposts,
allow for Palestinian freedom of movement and reopen closed Palestinian
institutions in Jerusalem, even though some of those obligations (the
need to stop settlement expansion, for one) carry no security risk
whatsoever.

The reason that Israel resumed its policy of assassinating Palestinians
on July 9 in Burqeen near Jenin, August 9 in Askar refugee camp near
Nablus, and August 15 in Hebron, in killings that Palestinian political
leaders specifically warned would initiate a resumption of the cycle of
violence, can only be Israel's political fear. The Israeli government,
facing more than a month of a successful and unilateral Palestinian
ceasefire, was suddenly being forced to answer questions about the
hundreds of checkpoints barring Palestinian movement, the permit policy
preventing Palestinians from leaving their towns, and of course, the
continuing confiscation of Palestinian land in order to build more
settlements and construct a devastating barrier on West Bank land--all
of which contravene international law.

These Israeli practices were abruptly exposed to heightened criticism by
the outside world, including the United States, and I think that Israeli
decision-makers reached a point where they had to choose: either
continue the period of quiet and actually reassess Israel's practices
that consolidate the occupation, or resume the assassinations and try to
drag Palestinians back into the vicious circle of violence in order to
obscure the world's view of those less sensational activities that
ordinarily do not attract diplomatic attention.

As such, there are two broad explanations for the collapse of the
negotiations process. First, there is Israel's success in implementing
the roadmap selectively, which prevented the Palestinian leadership and
public from seeing any political light at the end of the occupation
tunnel. Instead, Palestinians saw progress in achieving Israeli
security, and since Palestinians view the security problems and violence
as an inevitable outcome of Israeli occupation, they could not
comprehend the value of a process meant only to heal the symptoms of
occupation, rather than excise the disease.

We repeatedly warned that this defect in implementing the first phase of
the roadmap would doom the process. The only means of rescuing the
roadmap now is to implement a dramatic decline in settlement expansion
and other Israeli commitments, at the same time that there is an
improvement in security conditions.

The second explanation is that the ceasefire, which was adhered to
successfully by the Palestinian factions, cannot continue unilaterally.
The persistence of Israeli assassinations or "arrests that end in
killing" grates against the Palestinian desire to implement calm. One
might add that the Americans also did not comply with their roadmap
obligations as monitors of all components of the roadmap's first phase
(not only the security components) and therefore significantly
contributed to the roadmap collapse.

This progression of events has proven once again that only two things
will end the crisis and accompanying violence. First, Israel must get
out of the Palestinian Authority areas and allow Palestinians to handle
their security duties without Israeli interference. Second, there is no
substitute for a progressive, aggressive peace process. When the
Palestinian Authority is engaged in a process that is about ending the
Israeli occupation, then the Palestinian Authority will have the
political power to act in any way against anyone who is jeopardizing
that process.

But as long as Israel is continuing its assassinations here and there,
and as long as there is no sign of a lifting of the occupation's hold on
the public, it is difficult for the Palestinian Authority to take an
active security role. Further, as long as these conditions persist, any
internal Palestinian debate or power struggle is completely irrelevant
to the success of the peace process. No Palestinian can implement what
is being asked of the Palestinian side, as long as the Israeli side is
disregarding its part of the deal.

