The comparison between what is happening today in the lands of historic
Eretz Yisrael where Jews and Arabs live together, albeit in armed
conflict, and what took place between whites and blacks in South Africa,
is infuriating. This applies to both the practical as well as the
principled side of the issue.

The whites conquered territories in Africa, installed colonialist rule,
and a negligible minority ruled over an absolute majority. The lands
where the colonialist forces settled, including in South Africa, were
taken from their former inhabitants.

In contrast, the Jews returned to their historic homeland, from which
they had been exiled for nearly 2,000 years. All the territories that
were settled since the commencement of the orderly, slow and
non-threatening return of the Jewish people to its land in the last
quarter of the 19th c. were, without exception, purchased at full price.
Moreover, when the Jews began to return to their land its foreign
rulers, the Ottoman Empire, ruled over Arabs and Jews alike. This points
to an additional indisputable historic fact: after the Jews went into
exile the land was ruled only by foreign conquerors; no other nation
established its sovereignty there.

The Jewish people's war of independence in 1948-9 was in fact initiated
by the Arabs. On May 15, 1948 five Arab standing armies--of Egypt,
Syria, Transjordan, Iraq and Lebanon--invaded the country that had that
day declared its independence. After nearly two years of a tough and
painful defensive war in which the Jewish people, scarcely three years
after the Holocaust, lost one percent of its sons and daughters,
including Holocaust survivors, the invaders were expelled. Under United
Nations auspices armistice agreements were signed with the invading states.

The 1949 armistice lines could have been converted into borders
sanctioned by peace agreements had the Arabs so desired. Instead, they
geared up for a second round. After 19 years, 10 of them accompanied by
constant hostile but not decisive aggression, Egypt closed the Tiran
Straits in May 1967, expelled the UN from Sinai and thereby in effect
declared war on Israel. Syria joined her, as did, in the course of the
war itself, Jordan.

It was in this war that the Jewish people returned to the very heart of
its land, the land of the Bible: to Judea, Samaria and the Gaza Strip,
and to the Old City of Jerusalem, the Temple Mount and the Western Wall.

After several years hesitation there began a movement of settlement in
these liberated territories. True, to put it mildly, the settlers were
not welcomed by the Arabs. But that does and cannot make this a "South
African situation". The Arabs were offered--in complete contrast to
their situation under Jordanian rule--political solutions which, had
they embraced them, would long ago have given them sovereignty, had that
indeed been their true objective.

The Oslo accords, which I opposed because I knew their outcome would be
catastrophic, created an "irreversible" reality leading to the creation
of such a sovereign state. Some 42 percent of Judea and Samaria were
delivered over to the Palestinian Authority. This is, in practice,
sovereignty. And in these effectively sovereign territories dwell 96
percent of the Palestinians. Prior to the terror war they launched in
October 2000 they were, unlike the blacks under apartheid, free of any
Israeli rule, enjoying all the symbols of sovereignty: a flag,
presidential and parliamentary elections, media free of any Israeli
control (but not of control by Yasser Arafat), and foreign relations
with many countries, including representation in the UN. Israel withdrew
from these territories and, had they not been used for the launching of
Qasam rockets or suicide bombers, would never have returned, certainly
not to rule. Even we, the settlers, acquiesced de facto in this withdrawal.

But the Palestinians did not suffice with a state alongside Israel. They
wanted, and still want, a state instead of Israel. This is the central
reason for the current terror war in which Palestinians too have
suffered greatly-and not Israel's rule which, in the eyes of those who
are ignorant of history and harbor a pathological hatred for Israel,
somehow seems to resemble apartheid.

