Q: Recently, it has been said that the ceasefire cannot be
over, that Palestinians have no other choice right now, and that even
Hamas doesn't really have a choice.

A: I think that there is a chance that a ceasefire could be
agreed upon once again, but this is not the only possibility. A new
ceasefire will have to have better guarantees in order to be respected
by both sides--especially by the Israelis--and in order to be convincing
for the Palestinian movement and the Palestinian people. Otherwise, I
think that the present cycle of violence will continue and perhaps
become more violent than what we have seen over the last three years of
the intifada.

In spite of that, I believe that the option of a negotiated settlement
is, in the final analysis, the only option that could end this struggle.
For the time being, I think that the conditions for this option have not
yet matured, mainly because Israelis have not come to the conclusion
that they have to address the main needs and rights of the Palestinian
people, even within the framework of the roadmap
                                                .

Q: Do you support the roadmap?

A: I have a lot of criticisms of many of the provisions of the
roadmap. From the beginning, I thought that the unconditional acceptance
of the roadmap by the Palestinian leadership, even before it [the
roadmap] was formally presented to both sides was an error--not because
the roadmap should have been rejected, but because this opened the way
for the Israeli rejection of the roadmap through its "comments"
                                                       on the text.

Now the roadmap has become a general framework for strenuous
negotiations between the two parties, and without the international
supervision that was promised in the text itself. The whole time
framework that was included in the text has exploded, leaving the
Israelis in complete control of the development of the process and
therefore capable of dictating the terms. This makes the roadmap an
Israeli solution, rather than an international compromise between the
two parties.

I think that there are positive aspects within the roadmap that could be
a basis for the future of a negotiated settlement, especially the call
for an independent sovereign Palestinian state and the call for an end
to the occupation of 1967.

Q: What is your impression of the government of Prime
Minister Mahmoud Abbas?

A: The attitude taken by the present government towards the
negotiations on the roadmap is basically incorrect. I think that they
have drifted along with Israeli and American attempts to undermine all
of the positive aspects of the roadmap and to turn the present process
into a series of security dictates. This has weakened the popular base
of the present government and may gradually lead to its collapse.

Q: You were one of those who called for Palestinian
national dialogue with Hamas. Do you think that there have been positive
results of this dialogue, and how can this dialogue continue?

A: There was a positive result of this dialogue in that, for
the first time in the history of the Palestinian movement, there was
unanimous agreement on a ceasefire with Israel. This did not occur even
in 1980 or in 1981 in Lebanon. All the ceasefires that were declared by
the Palestinian leadership had people that opposed them and sabotaged them.

Now, for the first time, we have a general consensus on this ceasefire
on the bases that were developed by the different factions, which are
actually the same terms included in the roadmap itself. Even those
factions that are against the roadmap have actually adopted the same
terms for the ceasefire that were included in the roadmap.

This was a step forward and I think that this could have been a sound
basis for continuing dialogue in order to arrive at a common platform
for a unified national command to include all of the Palestinian
factions, and also the Palestinian Authority and Palestine Liberation
Organization.

Q: You are a political leader. You said that it is possible
that the violence could get much worse. Personally, how do you feel
about that? Is the prospect of a very violent turn of events worth it?

A: Personally, I feel very much distressed, of course. I think
that what we are actually asking for and what we are fighting for is a
peaceful settlement that is based on recognition of the right of the
Palestinian people to an independent and sovereign state within the
borders of 1967. If the Israelis agree to that, and if the Americans
actually press the Israelis to meet this Palestinian demand, I think
that we could have a very simple and very short way out of this
continued violence.

I do not feel comfortable with the continuation of violence and war, but
this is an option that has been forced upon the Palestinian people. They
have to fight to the end. If they have to do it through military means,
then they will--despite the hardships.

But they will do it not because they want to fight, but because fighting
is necessary to reach their goal of a peace that meets their national
aspirations, and the aspiration of independence.

