For a long while, it hasn't really been possible to use the term "Arab
diplomacy," simply because of the differences in strategies and
approaches that have characterized Arab activities over much of the
lifetime of the modern Arab state.

The last two years, however, have witnessed significant developments
towards a coherent Arab diplomatic track--evidenced in what was first
the Saudi, and then the Arab peace initiative, and later by the joint
diplomatic efforts and activities of three prominent Arab foreign
ministers, those of Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan. The impetus behind
these developments was the Intifada and its regional and international
consequences, as well as the events of September 11 and the subsequent
war in Afghanistan.

These dramatic occurrences motivated the Arab world to try to act
together. On more than one occasion, the Intifada had spilled over into
Arab streets through widespread protests. At the same time, Arab support
for the American role in Afghanistan was not very popular with the Arab
public and required some compensation in diplomatic currency that would
contribute to solving the Palestinian problem.

Unfortunately, there were additional unusual circumstances playing
against the success of these initiatives. First, there was the Israeli
government then (and still) of a political camp and ideological
background completely incompatible with an Arab initiative based on the
peace process terms of reference and relevant stipulations of
international law. The composition of the administration in Washington
also factored against the Arab diplomacy; this remains an administration
with unprecedented bias towards Israel and seemingly dismissive of the
needs, rights and legitimate demands of the Palestinian people.

But in all fairness, it must be said that Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon was the deciding factor in Israel's discounting of the Arab
initiative. He was largely responsible for missing this historic
opportunity, one that offered resolution of Israel's ultimate and
legitimate objectives--the end of the Arab-Israeli conflict, Israel's
recognition and the normalizing of relations. All of this might have
been possible, had there been a leadership in charge truly committed to
an Israel with secure borders and normal peaceful relations--not only
with Palestinians--but with the entire Arab world.

There is another important reason, however, why the Arab initiative and
Arab diplomacy in general is not taken seriously by the key
international players in the Middle East. For the United States and
European Union, there remains a missing link between Arab diplomatic
positions directed at either Israel or the United States, Arab demands
of those countries, and the interests of these major powers. The history
of Arab-international relations has shown that neither Israel nor any
other country, for that matter, has a great deal to lose in terms of its
relationship with the Arab world and its interests. In order for Arab
diplomacy to be more successful, it must be connected to the vital
interests of the significant powers in the region.

