Q: Where do you think that American policy is going right now
vis a vis the Israeli-Palestinian conflict?

A: I think that the administration is still in major disarray
following the elections themselves and the court appointment of United
States President Bush and the events of 9-11. The election process that
brought Bush to the presidency sent a message to President Bush that he
needs to appease the pro-Israeli lobby in the States in order to secure
a second round of elections and I think that this has been dictating his
administration's policy since day one.

Also, after 9-11, the administration has been unable to define what the
"enemy" of the United States actually is. One day, it is the so-called
"axis of evil" and the next day it is the Palestinians and next it is
the Iraqis and the Koreans. I think these two issues have dictated
disarray in setting administration foreign policy.

Q: What do you think that US business interests are in this
region and are they being facilitated?

A: I think that the United States is still in need of a
macro-archenemy and economically has not progressed beyond the Cold War
mindset. In the eighties, there was the telecom deregulation. That
promised the moon to the US economy, but it turned out that the bubble
burst. Look at the nineties with the exaggerated internet market.
Another bubble, but it burst. In the new century, we were looking at a
new bubble in biotechnology industry.

All of these false attempts to recreate the US economy, in my view,
point to the fact that the US is still in a military industrial complex
mindset. For that military industrial complex to work, it needs a
foreign enemy. If you look at the Bush administration per se, with his
cabinet and himself and their affairs with big business ventures that
are tied to the military, it becomes even more clear that there is still
an-old style economy in the States that is looking for someone to prey
upon abroad.

I don't think that US policy is serving average Americans, or even
average corporate America--not big business, but corporate America. The
interest of the average American or business is to have political and
economic stability and that can only come with a Palestinian-Israeli
resolution.

Q: Do you see any successes in US Middle East policy over the
last two years?

A: I think, to be frank, US policy towards the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has failed. Unfortunately, no one has taken responsibility for
it. We are watching the administration try to grab for air and it is
doing a very poor job at it.

Q: What are Palestinians saying about a US attack on Iraq?

A: People are worried that a US strike on Iraq may give a green
light to the Sharon government to proceed in his plan of two years and
going of destroying anything Palestinians have achieved, whether that be
the Palestinian Authority or anything associated with the state-building
process that we have been in for the last ten years. Such an attack, I
think, would move the world's attention away from the
Palestinian-Israeli issues--which happen to be the core issues--to Iraq.
This could be catastrophic for our region.

Q: Do you have any predictions about what could unfold?

A: Everything being discussed on the street--and what the media has
exposed lately--is that the Sharon government may try a mass expulsion
of Palestinians into Jordan. This is something that Sharon has dreamed
and written and spoken about throughout his entire political life.

Personally, I think that won't happen--that's an extreme. I think that
other potential ramifications may just be a continued slow destruction
process. Gaza has not yet been entered [by the Israeli army] as the West
Bank has been. A strike on Iraq could be the perfect pretext.

