The projected United States campaign to remove Saddam Hussein and his
regime from power in Iraq clearly serves an Israeli interest. Saddam is
a threat to Israeli and indeed regional security and stability. But if
the campaign fails, it is fraught with dangers for Israel, particularly
with regard to the Jordanian-Palestinian sphere.

Similarly, US President George W. Bush's policies regarding
democratization within the Palestinian Authority--a noble goal by any
standard, Israeli or Palestinian--represent a high stakes gamble from
Israel's standpoint.

It is discomfiting to contemplate the prospect that US plans for the
region are not well thought out.

It is also easy to identify with the Bush administration's grand design
to eliminate Muslim extremist influence and venal and corrupt leaders
like Saddam Hussein and Yasir Arafat. But that design could fail.
Alternatively, it could "succeed," as it did in Afghanistan, where Qaida
and Bin Laden apparently still exist and the American-installed regime
is so unstable that the leader, Qarzai, has to be protected by American
soldiers. In this sense there is something troubling in what the Council
on Foreign Relations' Youssef Ibrahim calls the administration's "simple
speak" approach to our region. And of course it doesn't help that Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon appears perfectly at ease with these policies.

Moving to specifics, in the Palestinian sphere the Bush administration
has linked any new peace process to a "reform" plan that is supposed to
bring about the removal from power of Yasir Arafat and the
democratization of Palestinian society. If that plan fails, then the
peace process is ostensibly frozen and Israel's hands are tied until
further notice--unless, of course, Bush and Sharon choose to
acknowledge, tacitly or declaratively, that their approach was
misbegotten. Yet even if it succeeds, we run the danger of the Algeria
phenomenon, whereby American pressure for democratic elections produced
a Muslim fundamentalist victory and ushered in a seemingly endless civil
war. Moderate Arab leaders like Egypt's Mubarrak have been warning the
US to lay low on Middle East democratization ever since.

Perhaps of even greater concern are the dumbed-down rules of Rumsfeld.
When the American secretary of defense talks so benignly of the
occupation of the West Bank and the ongoing construction of settlements,
he may--it's debatable--be scoring a few points for an objective reading
of history and land rights in the region. But he is also dooming Israel
to the fate of South Africa: a Jewish minority hopelessly intertwined
territorially with an Arab majority over which it rules with
increasingly apartheid-like tactics. In an era when more and more
Israelis, right and left, are focusing on the demographic threat to
Israel's long-term identity and security, it is lamentable that this
concern is not echoed by a single senior figure in a US administration
that purports to cherish Israel as a democratic, Jewish state.

In the US-Iraqi sphere, the big danger to Israel's interest in a long
term stable relationship with the Palestinian people concerns Jordan. In
the 1991 Gulf War, King Hussein succeeded in maneuvering among three
strategic constraints--the allegiance of Jordan's majority Palestinian
population to Iraq, Iraq's own implicit threat to Jordan's integrity,
and American and Arab pressures to join the coalition--and brought
Jordan through the crisis relatively safely, albeit at the cost of
misplaced American pique. In the event of a new (and possibly more
prolonged and messy) US-Iraq conflict, King Abdullah's Jordan may be
exposed to fewer Arab pressures--there is little likelihood of an
American-Arab coalition this time--but to more pressures from the US to
use its territory for attacking Iraq, and to heavier pressure from the
Palestinian "street," in view of the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. The Hashemite regime is increasingly nervous about the dangers
to domestic stability posed by the overflow from an American-initiated
dual conflict situation to its east and its west.

Of course the Hashemites, like the rest of us, stand to benefit from the
removal of Saddam Hussein. Conceivably even the dream of a restoration
of Hashemite rule in Baghdad may no longer be mere wishful thinking for
some key figures in Amman. But Jordanians are also preoccupied with
darker scenarios: the forcible transfer of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians from the West Bank, refugees flooding in from Iraq, and
mass rioting in the streets of Jordan's cities, all under cover of war.
Israeli and American leaders, for whom the worst conceivable outcome of
new unrest in the Middle East would be the Palestinization of Jordan,
should find ways to reassure Jordan, publicly and privately.

