Q: Does United States policy in our region--concerning Iraq,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and democratization--appear to you to
be consistent and beneficial from Israel's standpoint?

A: Each aspect of US policy stands alone, though ultimately they
are linked. Let's begin with Iraq. Here Israel is not an active player.
Of course we have relevant interests; after all, Iraq through its
behavior made itself a sworn enemy of Israel. But we have no quarrel
with Iraq--territorially, for example--and we don't dictate to the
Americans whether or not to attack Iraq. This is not Israel's war; I
don't know how or when the US will engage in it. Of course if Israel is
attacked, God forbid, it must defend itself. But this is not our war.
Nor is there an American-Arab coalition this time that Saddam would want
to dismantle by attacking us as in 1991.

This will also be a struggle over America's capacity to work in advance
to prevent negative developments in the Middle East. If Saddam remains
in place after the war, then we shall be dealing with a new agenda that
will determine the limits of American force, and the world will become a
more dangerous place. But an American victory will oblige the countries
in the region to be more considerate of its policies.

Q: How will the outcome of an American-Iraqi war affect the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict?

A: The Iraqi file is a sad one for the Palestinians. In 1991 they
thought Saladin was bringing them salvation. Since then only Israel has
grown stronger, and the Arab world has been falling apart. Today too
Saddam is intervening in the conflict in his twisted way and the
Palestinian people are paying a price for it. I hope that if Saddam is
removed, another Palestinian delusion will be dispensed with. But this
does not yet dispense with the conflict. The decision is still with the
Palestinians, not the Americans, whether to end the conflict honorably.
Yet in recent years we are witness to the Palestinian leadership
avoiding responsibility, regardless of the Iraqi issue.

Q: Let's move on to American policy in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Consistent? Beneficial?

A: All former American presidents invested great effort and
resources in an attempt to solve the conflict. The current president
apparently has the unique capacity to see complex conflicts as simple
problems. He has identified Arafat as the focal problem for solving the
conflict. This is a very simplistic approach, but perhaps it's the
truth. [US envoy] General Zinni also quickly grasped that you can't
depend on a word Arafat says. Most of the Palestinian leadership is also
of the opinion that Arafat is the problem. Therefore if the reforms
demanded by America are carried out, this will create a genuine change.
US policy--coupled with the "quartet's" activities and pressures from
Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Jordan, internal Palestinian activity and
judicious activity by Israel--can create a chance for significant reform.

Q: And US policy regarding democratization in the Arab world?

A: Like any democrat body and soul--one who has even changed some
of his positions regarding the conflict in view of the supreme
democratic imperative without which I can't live, regarding human
rights, the rule of the majority, and so forth--I want the Arab
countries to be democratic too. But there are almost no such Arab
states, and this is a worrisome phenomenon. This American goal is good
and vital and positive, but we must not condition everything on
democratization. If [Syrian President Bashar] Assad shows up tomorrow
and offers us peace "with the borders that you want," I don't suggest
that we tell him "no, no, not until you're a democrat." After all we're
talking about a struggle between civilizations.

