The visit of Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to Washington on April
14, intended to solicit American support for Sharon's unilateral plan
for Gaza and to formalize letters of assurances
                          between Sharon and United States President
George W. Bush, was an unprecedented affair, not only in
Israeli-American relations, but in the history of American foreign
policy. It is difficult to remember any previous occasion on which an
American president so bluntly contradicted specific stipulations of
United Nations Security Council resolutions and international law.

This came as a shock, not only to Palestinians, but to Arabs in general,
especially that Bush's statements were made only days after his meeting
with the president of the largest and most important Arab state,
Egyptian leader Hosni Mubarak, and while Mubarak was still in the
country. This signaled to the Arabs that the United States is ready to
offer an extraordinary level of support for Israel even when Israel's
demands contradict international legality, and--most stunningly--that
American Middle East policy gives no weight at all to American relations
with the Arab world.

Given that, the consequences of Bush's assurances to Sharon extend
beyond harming the chances of a renewed peace process between Israelis
and Palestinians. First, these assurances justify and consequently
encourage right-wing Israeli extremists to proceed with their settlement
expansion advocacy, which will ultimately and ironically bring about the
final death of Bush's "vision"                     of two states living
side by side. Bush's concurrence, included in his letter to Sharon, that
the borders contained in a final agreement be modified to accommodate
Israel's settlements is certainly going to encourage settlement
expansion and further strengthen the hand of Israeli settlers.
Thirty-five years of illegal settlement expansion have now been
recognized and legitimated by the president of the only remaining
superpower in the world.

Internationally, there are many who worry that this precedent of
accepting demographic changes instituted by an occupying power will
damage the validity of international conventions, as well as the very
institution of international law. Lest we forget, the framework of
international law was created to protect the weak in the wake of
unconscionable historical precedent.

The letters of assurances exchanged between Bush and Sharon contradict
the roadmap plan                         (which is backed by
international legality) on three specific points. First, while Bush
referred to the 1949 borders, the roadmap recognized the 1967 borders
and stipulated that its objective was to achieve an end to the
occupation that began in 1967. The roadmap also refers to "agreed-upon"
modifications in the 1967 borders, in line with previous negotiations
that agreed on swapping some Israeli settlement areas for land in Israel
of equal quality and size. Bush discarded this notion and substituted
the idea of population density as a reference point in final border
delineation.

Second, according to international law and the roadmap, the refugee
issue must be solved via negotiations. It is well known that
Palestinians are demanding what has been guaranteed them in
international law, i.e. implementation of the right of return to the
homes they left behind in 1948. President Bush's letter, however,
confines the refugees' return to the future Palestinian state, whose
borders are not yet determined.

Third, not only did Bush deign to demand an immediate cessation to
Israel's expansion of settlements, a theme in all previous agreements
and plans, but he suggested that Israel annex that part of the occupied
territories on which the settlements have been built in contravention of
international law.

The final analysis is deeply pessimistic. Amidst all the platitudes
about "getting peace back on track" and the prospect of an
"unprecedented Israeli withdrawal" from settlements, Israel is managing
to pull the wool over everyone's eyes. Sharon's written plans for Gaza
state clearly that Israel will maintain direct and full Israeli control
over all exits: airport, port and land crossing points from and to the
Gaza Strip. In addition, Israel will intervene militarily inside Gaza
whenever it feels the need, thus promising that Israel's army will
continue to be an unwelcome guest on Palestinian land.

Anybody with even the slightest knowledge of the size and economic
realities of Gaza can see that there is no significant difference
between the current situation of an Israeli military and settler
presence on certain areas of Gaza away from Palestinian population
centers coupled with unrelenting control over borders and, on the other
hand, the situation to be created when Sharon's plan is in place.

Further, Sharon's assurance letter has negative ramifications for the
treaties between Israel, on the one hand, and Jordan and Egypt, on the
other. Both documents specified the need for a negotiated and accepted
solution for the Palestinian refugee problem. There is a strong feeling
in the region that the escalation immediately following Sharon's return
from the United States was indirectly encouraged by Bush's unjustified
support. Military incursions have increased, the closure is deadening,
the assassinations have been stepped up and Sharon has felt free enough
to issue direct threats against the life of the legitimately elected
leader of the Palestinian people.

The outcome of this entire exercise was a further decline in the
credibility of the United States in the Arab world (one wonders if it
can get worse). The biases expressed by Bush have also affected the
internal balance of power inside Israel in favor of the right wing, the
traditional opponents of the peace process and a solution based in
international law. We are no closer today, then, to a solution that will
end the Israeli occupation of Palestinians, which is the source of all
violence, in exchange for peace, security and economic prosperity for
all countries in the region.

