The day businessman David Apel was indicted for, among other things,
bribing Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, Member of Knesset Michael Eitan was
one of the few political personalities from the coalition who agreed to
be interviewed on the subject. Eitan told TV viewers: "That's the way it
is here; when a right wing prime minister is suspected of corruption the
opposing camp is up in arms--and vice versa".

Thus Eitan, in a single sentence, captured the total politicization of
Israel's normative system, along with the unbreakable link between it
and the occupation. The "camp", after all, is defined first and foremost
on the basis of its attitude toward the occupation or the solution it
prefers for the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. All the rest is a
byproduct of this association, including the attitude toward corruption.

This politicization has fouled all objective norms for assessing the
behavior of elected officials and public figures. Within the camp,
tribal style, the rule is to exonerate anyone who has strayed from the
path of righteousness and to demand only the heads of those in the
opposing camp. Even now, when suspicions concerning Sharon's behavior
are piling up daily, only the weak political opposition is calling upon
the prime minister to provide clear answers. The politicians in his own
camp, whose fate depends on his, are silent--as are those who elected
him. They are more frightened of transferring power to the "enemy camp"
than of the corruption that threatens Israeli society. Thus do money and
power walk hand in hand, unfettered, as long as they take the political
path supported by the majority. What's a "Greek island"--one of the
cases in which the names of Sharon and his deputy, Ehud Olmert, are
mentioned as recipients of bribes--against the opportunity to prevent a
weakened prime minister from removing a single illegal outpost?

This is not the way to fight corruption, but rather to perpetuate it.
Pretty soon we can replace the Magen David (Star of David) on the
national flag with a yellow banana.

The Israeli collective memory still focuses on the resignation of Prime
Minister Yitzhak Rabin from his first government in 1977 after it was
revealed that his wife maintained an illegal dollar account in an
American bank. That kind of reaction is unthinkable today. In the late
1980s tens of thousands of Israelis took to the streets under the slogan
"we're fed up with crooks." Then, the public reaction to corruption led
to a change in the electoral system, which also failed. But today there
are no such demonstrations. Everything goes: straw non-governmental
organizations that bankroll election campaigns; vote buying; and even an
attempt by a businessman to purchase a Greek island with the help of
politicians. The prevailing public mood holds that everyone is
corrupt--hence those in power should at least be "our crooks". For their
part, the ruling circles exploit the security situation and the public's
fear of terrorism and fabricate non-accountable modes of governance.

One factor abetting this atmosphere is the sectoral nature of Israeli
society. Instead of a demanding civil society, we have interest groups.
The public's assets are not considered as deposits held on account for
services rendered to it, but rather as "catch as catch can" booty for
specific interest groups. Like soldiers who conquer a village and loot
its TV sets, anyone who takes power pillages whatever assets he/she
finds. The public, for its part, is preoccupied with an existential
struggle to survive, paralyzed by fear of terrorism and groaning under
the yoke of a collapsing economy--itself a direct consequence of the
ongoing occupation. Under these circumstances, it has neither the
strength nor the capacity to demand transparency and accountability from
the government.

Thus does the public cultivate, with its own hands, the fertile soil for
the growth of corruption. The unemployed Israeli, worried sick about
his/her son who is serving in the territories and afraid to get on a
bus, has a hard time delving into the details of the case of Cyril Kern
and the money he gave the prime minister, and has long forgotten the
election bribery cases that implicated MK Naomi Blumenthal.

Midst these bewildering complications, the media plays a strange role.
Corruption cases grab the front-page headlines and thousands of words
are written and spoken daily about them. So what? The media is in any
case suspect of left wing sympathies, of giving expression to the
Palestinian narrative--and the public doesn't really believe what it
reads and hears. Corruption becomes a drama that sells newspapers, and
the contents of the front pages are treated like gossip columns.

No wonder so many are dreaming of a strong leader who'll restore order.
Some are even warning that this is exactly the kind of soil in which
fascism thrives.

