Nearly one year ago, the tragic events of September 11 set into motion
significant changes in American Middle East policy that have had a
negative impact on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The climax of that
change was illustrated in the infamous June speech of President George
W. Bush in which he nearly reclassified the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
as part of the "war on terror."

That was a dramatic about-face from considering the conflict's solution
to be one based on United Nations Security Council Resolution 242, which
calls for ending the illegal Israeli occupation, to one in which the
Palestinian efforts against that occupation have become illegal.

The other dramatic shift has been the administration's transformation of
the Palestine Liberation Organization and its chairman Yasser Arafat
from partners in an American-led peace process into targets for regime
change.

One can think of three reasons for these dramatic changes. One is the
current American over-sensitivity to violence against civilians as a
result of the tragedy of September 11. Second is the very
successfully-orchestrated media campaign by Israelis and their US
allies, a campaign launched days after September 11 and intended to mute
the realization of some that perhaps American support for unjust causes
and oppressive regimes including Israel was responsible for external
hostility. The third reason for this change was the series of Hamas
suicide bombings just a few weeks after September 11, which only aided
official Israeli efforts to associate the Palestinian struggle with
Osama bin Ladin's attacks.

But American policy towards Palestinians and Israelis has always fallen
victim to other developments--the war in Afghanistan being one example.
Palestinians are now worrying a great deal that the next example will be
the repercussions of an American war on Iraq. There are two main reasons
for that fear. The first is that Israel might take advantage of the
diversion to do really nasty things to Palestinians--more than has
already been visited upon them. The other reason for fear is the
possible association of Palestinians and Iraqis or the Palestinian
leadership and Iraq, both of which would further discredit the
Palestinian cause in the eyes of the American public.

Many Palestinians had in fact been hopeful that the most recent American
encounters with our conflict here would create insight and spur the
drawing of realistic conclusions--for one, that force never solves
problems. They had hoped Americans would see that what is happening here
as not simply the result of violence by a bunch of terrorists that can
be solved with their killing or arrest, but a classic case of
decolonization. Indeed, what motivates the Palestinian public is the
desire for freedom, liberty and self-determination--values that should
ring true for the American people and their leaders.

Instead, Palestinians were recently surprised to hear that, after the US
administration had promoted elections as a main vehicle for Palestinian
reform and eventual statehood, the administration has changed its mind.
In fact, US officials are now pushing for the postponement, if not the
completely abandonment of Palestinian elections scheduled for next year.
Their reasoning seems unprincipled; when US officials wanted to change
the Palestinian leadership, they thought elections would be a good idea.
But when it became clear that Palestinians were likely to elect the same
leadership, those same officials found that elections did not fit their
political desires.

It does not seem off the mark, then, to say that the American government
and the world's only superpower, is pursuing policies that fall far from
the requirements of international legality and the very values of the
American people.

