For some time now it has been obvious that neither Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon nor Palestinian Rais Yasir Arafat has a genuine
strategy for peace (or, for that matter, for war). Now we have the
"vision" of United States Secretary of State Colin Powell's speech of
November 19. It also fell short of constituting a strategic prescription
for a viable peace process.

So an American-sponsored peace process is not on the horizon. At best,
we are looking at an American-sponsored ceasefire effort. Yet Israelis
and Palestinians desperately need help at a much more fundamental level:
communicating. The most glaring breakdown of the past year has been not
the peace process, but the two sides' very capacity to speak with a
common vocabulary, to use a mutually understandable lexicon of terms to
describe their plights and their complaints. US officials William Burns
and Anthony Zinni can make a substantial contribution here. But only if
they have a serious mandate.

At this point their mandate is limited to reducing the violence and then
activating the Mitchell formula for confidence-building. This reflects
Washington's need to at least get our conflict "off the radar screen" as
long as the US needs Arab allies for waging its campaign against
terrorism. It also reflects American fears that, if the
Israeli-Palestinian violence continues at its present pace, Arafat will
over-provoke Israel and Sharon will eliminate the Palestinian Authority
altogether--with escalating and essentially unpredictable consequences.

As we anticipate the coming weeks and months of American involvement,
two key questions remain unanswered. First, how much authority does
Zinni have to "knock heads together", i.e., to imply or apply serious
American pressure in order to bring Sharon and Arafat into line? If his
mission functions like those of Burns, Tenet and even Powell before him,
then it is liable to fail. This would tend to confirm that, for Bush and
Powell, the mission is the message--i.e., sending Zinni to the region is
intended largely to buy Arab and Muslim good will for another few weeks
or months--and there is little motivation or energy in Washington to try
to work with Sharon and Arafat on a serious peace process.

Secondly, if and as the US moves from fighting radical terrorism in
Afghanistan to combating it in the Middle East theater--Iraq, Syria and
Lebanon are the primary candidates for American diplomatic pressure and
conceivably threats to use force--how will this affect American
calculations regarding the Arab-Israel sphere? Will the US then perceive
a greater need for a serious peacemaking effort? One possible byproduct
of such a situation could be an effort to broker new political
agreements between Jerusalem and Damascus, as part of a package that
includes Syrian measures against Hizballah, Hamas and Islamic Jihad.
Where would this leave the Israeli-Palestinian conflict?

Whatever the prospects of greater American involvement in the near
future, we should not lose sight of several emerging realities. For one,
both Ariel Sharon and Yasir Arafat have shown since September 11 that
they either don't fully comprehend the new mood in America, or don't
take Washington's needs seriously. Sharon's penchant for
comparisons--Bush to Chamberlain, Arafat to Bin Laden, the Palestine
Liberation Organization to the Taleban--left Americans furious. Arafat's
rhetoric has been more 'correct', but his empty commitments to crack
down on extremists have eroded his already doubtful credibility.

Then too, if and when the US does apply pressure on Sharon's
government--say, to commence the Mitchell process without a waiting
period, to cease settlement construction, and/or to offer significant
territorial concessions--the result will not be a peace process. It will
be the destabilization of the Sharon coalition government, which is
dedicated to the status quo of fighting the Intifada and is incapable of
sustaining either an all-out war or a peace process. And this, in turn,
will mean new elections in Israel. So a serious renewed peace process,
with or without the US, is probably at least a year or two away.

Further, however pro-Israel the US is--certainly compared to the
European Union--under present circumstances Washington is the
Palestinians' only hope for effective mediation with Israel. Yet we
would also do well to keep in mind what the record shows: that real
breakthroughs to peace in the Middle East, such as Sadat's 1977 trip to
Jerusalem, the Oslo Declaration of Principles and the Israeli-Jordanian
peace of 1994, have been made by Israel and an Arab partner alone,
without a significant American role.

