The foundations of the historic compromise have been shaken in this
cruelest month of April. The president of the United States, publicly
and clearly, redefined the right of return to mean the return to the
yet-to-be-born Palestine. He questioned the "sanctity" of the 1967
borders and sanctioned "reality on the ground" as a determining factor
for the future of settlements and borders. He committed the United
States to maintain Israel's qualitative edge over the Arabs and praised
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon for his bold steps toward peace as
he expressed his solidarity with Israel's fight against terror and its
acts of self-defense as it sees fit.

The Palestinians reacted with a mix of anger and foreboding. They could
hardly recover from the shock before they witnessed the killing of Hamas
leader Dr. Rantisi. Bellicose words were a sad substitute for their
sense of weakness and violation.

The Arab "street" as covered by Al Jazeera and other stations overflowed
with emotion and rhetoric, while the Arab states reacted
cautiously--after they expressed their eternal support for the
Palestinians and heaped their usual vitriol on Sharon. Egyptian
President Hosni Mubarak, fresh from a friendly visit to Texas, stated
that the Arabs' hatred for America was at its all-time high. Jordan's
King Abdullah wisely "postponed" his trip to Washington to be
rescheduled in a couple of weeks. The rest of the world dusted off its
usual remarks about peace.

Anger, lamentation and loud expressions of hatred directed against
America and its president and against Israel and the Arab regimes may
help vent anger but are no substitute for strategy. The Palestinians by
now have to come to grips with the fact that the support of Arab and
Muslim masses cannot and will not solve the problem of Palestine. It is
necessary but insufficient.

Palestinians must confront their problems squarely. They are a people
living under an oppressive occupation, with a weakened and isolated
leadership, without an army and with a tattered security force, a
wrecked economy and fractured institutions. The image of defenders of a
just cause has gradually and relentlessly metamorphosed into that of
terrorists. However, the historic injustice meted out to the
Palestinians, continues to define their struggle as the conflict of our
time and therein lies the Palestinian's winning card.

Whatever strategies the Palestinians have utilized in the past have not
worked. It is time to reflect, reassess and innovate. Violence may
preclude a solution but it will not achieve one. The Palestinians alone
cannot liberate Palestine. No people have sacrificed more, or longer,
than the Palestinians have, but sacrifice without a strategy designed to
win is not enough. In a struggle of this magnitude, more allies who, for
their own reasons, share the vision of a state of Palestine alongside
Israel are indispensable. Allies in the United States and in Israel, the
two countries that play a pivotal role in the outcome of this conflict,
have to be identified and mobilized. Violence against civilians
alienates these potential allies and the Palestinian people must make
the fateful choice between military confrontation and peaceful
resistance and negotiations.

The Palestinians must be given the opportunity to make and express their
choices. It is time, it is past time, for the Palestinians to go to the
voting booths and cast their ballots to elect their representatives. The
United States cannot seriously prevent a people from voting. That is as
un-American as the monarchy. The United States, once convinced, can
engage Israel to make elections feasible. All parties need to see that
the compromises required to achieve peace can only be made by elected
representatives. It would help to couple elections with a referendum on
a two-state solution based on the roadmap. The roadmap is the one
international instrument accepted by the Israeli and Palestinian
leadership, as well as by the Quartet and the Arab League. Such a
referendum would define the parameters of the political horizon for the
Palestinians. Opponents of the roadmap will lose their ability to thwart
progress if the referendum wins.

The Palestinians must also make choices about the future of Gaza after
Israel withdraws. Gaza must be made to work, thus depriving Israeli
hawks of an argument to extend the occupation of the West Bank. This
probable withdrawal offers the Palestinians an unusual opportunity, the
opportunity to plan for a future event rather than to cope with a done
deal. It should be viewed as the first milestone in establishing their
viable state. The suggestions put forth by Marwan Barghouti are worthy
of serious consideration. They provide the political context that makes
this withdrawal a step towards independence, rather than a downward
slide to the abyss.

But beyond that, concrete plans for housing, roads, parks, industrial
plants, schools and all aspects of living must be made and readied for
implementation. This project can best be done under the leadership of
international institutions like the World Bank, with active
participation of the Palestinians themselves. A formal new entity can be
entrusted with this task.

Free elections, with issues contested and choices starkly defined, will
make it possible for legitimate representatives to tackle issues of
Palestinian and Israeli security under the indispensable American
umbrella. Egypt and Jordan can and will play significant roles in
bringing this process to fruition.

The president of the United States should be taken at his word that the
final status issues are to be left to the parties. Prejudging the
outcome will not work. Only empowered legitimate representatives of both
peoples will have the authority and ability to make the compromises
needed for peace, and only they can make such peace permanent.

