Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon appears to be intent on carrying out
disengagement from the Gaza Strip and four West Bank settlements for all
the wrong reasons, with the wrong "partners" and the wrong objectives.
Yet the move is worthy of support, and for two reasons: first, any
reduction in Israeli occupation is a good thing; and second, the
precedent of withdrawal and dismantling of settlements is likely to
prove stronger in the long run than Sharon's transparent intention of
exploiting withdrawal from one occupied territory (Gaza) as an excuse
for remaining in another (the West Bank).

The biggest danger to Sharon's disengagement plan is Sharon himself, or
more precisely, his penchant for turning simple, straightforward and
positive ideas--dismantling settlements, the security fence, the two
state solution--into complex schemes with multiple and doubtful
objectives, one of which is liable to become so complicated as to bring
down the whole house of cards.

Sharon's exchange of letters                           with United
States President George W. Bush, followed by renewed assassinations of
Hamas leaders and now threats against Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat,
are the latest wrinkles. Politically, the objective of these popular
initiatives is to win over voters in the Likud referendum. This would
free Sharon to carry out disengagement, conceivably with his current
coalition, but if not then with a mandate to establish an alternative
government. But Bush has his political needs and objectives too, and the
American president undoubtedly has already taken note of Sharon's
inclination to exploit Bush's largess (and political weakness) and begin
violating Israeli-American commitments even before the ink on them is
dry--by threatening to kill Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, pledging
to include Ariel within the fence, and permitting Minister of Finance
Binyamin Netanyahu to pledge additional funds for settlements that lie
beyond the fence and the settlement blocs.

A related complicating factor is the fate of the roadmap
                        and the Israeli-Palestinian peace process.
Bush's readiness to offer Sharon commitments concerning settlement blocs
and refugees, however obvious and consensual they may seem from an
Israeli-American standpoint, nevertheless ostensibly preempts a
negotiated peace process and negates the roadmap. This has already
incurred the anger of both moderate Arab leaders and roadmap partners.
It is also cementing the flawed but devastating "Iraq = Palestine" image
in the eyes of many in the Middle East. This is not good for either
Israel or the US.

Yet a third problematic issue is Sharon's apparent attempt to exploit
popular support--now dangerously translated by him into a superfluous
party referendum--and Bush's endorsement for disengagement as a means of
pressuring Attorney General Menahem Mazuz to draw back from indicting
Sharon on any of three different influence peddling charges. It is
stunning to note the list of prominent Israelis from the left and
center, all desperate to begin rolling back the settlements, who have
publicly acknowledged that Sharon has criminal tendencies but
nevertheless call on Mazuz to desist--in the national interest. If Mazuz
proves not to be intimidated, and decides that Sharon should go on
trial--and there is a 50-50 chance that this will happen long before
disengagement is scheduled to begin--then the entire praiseworthy
enterprise of dismantling settlements, which Sharon has mortgaged to his
personal interest, will suffer a setback. Further, if Sharon loses the
referendum, i.e., if a tiny percentage of the voters is allowed to
torpedo the disengagement project, then not only will he be a lame duck
prime minister and easy pickings for Mazuz, but it may take years before
the Israeli body politic again addresses the urgent need to dismantle
settlements.

Sharon advocates disengagement for one reason: he argues that the
political vacuum opened up on the Israeli-Palestinian scene (which he,
together with Arafat, had a hand in creating) is liable to be filled,
god forbid, by Israeli or post-election US demands that Israel forego
more territory than Sharon intends. He totally ignores the truly
compelling reasons for withdrawal--the demographic threat, the
counterproductive nature of occupation--perhaps because they apply
equally to the West Bank and to the Gaza Strip. Instead of withdrawing
as an interim security step, he seeks a preemptive political step. And
because his intention is to preclude final status at the political level
he needs a partner, the US, for what was supposed to have been a
unilateral act.

Hopefully, the logic of disengagement will prove stronger than all of
Sharon's mistakes. In the absence of a viable Palestinian partner for
peace, let Sharon (who is hardly a viable Israeli partner for peace)
remove settlements. If and when that happens, and assuming as we must
that we still won't have a viable Palestinian partner for negotiations,
it will be incumbent upon supporters of a genuine two state solution in
Israel, the United States, the Arab world and the international
community to exploit the momentum of withdrawal and press for additional
unilateral Israeli acts of disengagement.

Meanwhile, the Palestinians should temper their protests with a
realistic acknowledgement of the advantages this process entails for
them, and some soul searching regarding their own input into Bush's
decision to ignore them.

* * *

Few observers seem to have noticed that the Bush administration took
advantage of the Bush-Sharon exchange in order to introduce a
significant new concept to the Middle East peace process. In both his
spoken remarks                                 and his letter to Sharon
on April 14, Bush states: "it is unrealistic to expect that the outcome
of final status negotiations will be a full and complete return to the
armistice lines of 1949. . . ." Not the 1967 lines, which here and there
are disputed between Israelis and Palestinians and especially between
Israelis and Syrians--but the 1949 lines, which at the time were clearly
delineated by the United Nations. This is a signal to Jerusalem and
Damascus that when they resume negotiations, they should adopt a
radically different territorial point of departure.

