Between the lines of United States Secretary Colin Powell's Kentucky
speech were some compelling messages to both Israelis and Palestinians.
For the Israelis the message was clear and stark: choose between peace
and security on the one hand, and the occupation with the settlements in
place on the other hand. You cannot have both. For the Palestinians the
choice was equally clear: either a continuation of the violence or a
move back to negotiations for a political settlement. Again, no way for
both to proceed together.

A masterful balancing act, one could say. The gauntlet was thrown down
to both sides. Yet the Secretary's careful choice of words could not
hide the pent-up frustration that the US administration is feeling with
both Palestinians and Israelis. That feeling is particularly strong with
regard to one person--Yasir Arafat. I met with some administration
officials in Washington recently and the criticism I heard of Arafat was
devastating. His failure to halt the violence, to arrest the
ringleaders, and to take more drastic action against the extremist
dissident groups is seen in Washington as an almost historical
disservice he is doing to his own people and the main cause for the
present impasse. Hence the humiliation that Arafat suffered at the hands
of President Bush in New York.

Nor is Ariel Sharon conceived to be much better. His Czechoslovakia
speech will be long remembered, and his procrastinating ploys aimed to
delay implementing the Mitchell plan are one of the main causes for the
frustration felt when dealing with the Arab-Israel conflict. There
exists a strong inclination to say "a plague on both your houses" and to
wait for an eventual settlement when Palestinians and Israelis have
different leaders. However, since September 11 that luxury is no longer
possible; hence Secretary Powell's Kentucky commitment to keep General
Zinni and Undersecretary Burns in the region until violence ends and
progress is made. That particular operational input in the speech
elevated it from a generalized vision of a better future for the Middle
East into an urgent plan of action.

It has become all to plain in Washington that the only possible way a
ceasefire can be attained and a possible political settlement reached,
is with an energetic and forceful involvement on the part of the US in
the proceedings. Without it, neither Arafat nor Sharon are capable of
pulling their people out of the quagmire that the present stalemate has
become.

They realize, moreover, that the guidelines for a settlement exist. They
were formulated by President Clinton in the last days of his presidency.
It can be stated with reasonable certainty that the Palestinians will
not accept less and the Israelis will not agree to give up more. Neither
side was happy with the Clinton formula; for the present Israeli
government the Clinton proposals are completely unacceptable. The road
to achieving that objective will therefore be a long and tortuous one,
with many obstacles on the way. The journey will have to be made in
stages, with the opening stages being an effort to bring an end to the
violence and a freeze on all settlement-building. The road will then
become more uphill, and only with a tenacious and insistent involvement
of the US can the end objective be reached--peace and security, and an
end of the occupation. The importance of Secretary Powell's speech is
that, for the first time since the Bush administration took over the
reins of power in Washington, the promise of such an involvement was
made. It remains to be seen how effective it will be.

