Let's be frank: corruption is found the world over. Where corruption
makes world headlines, however, is in those parts of the world where
there is intense international scrutiny, and especially in regions where
accusations of corruption are used for political machinations. This is
certainly the case in Israel and Palestine. Added to the mix is the fact
that Israel and Palestine collectively receive an immense amount of
foreign aid per capita. Donor countries are obviously keen on preventing
the misuse and squandering of their funds.

The first Palestinian government or authority is only ten years old, but
that short life span has been characterized by an inordinate amount of
discussion and debate over the issue of corruption and reform. This
focus comes from three directions: Palestinian watchdogs and
governmental individuals and organizations, the donors and international
community, and finally, Israel.

The issue of corruption was first raised in Palestine in 1995 when the
Palestinian comptroller evaluated the performance of different
ministries in the Palestinian Authority and described specific
irregularities. The Palestinian Legislative Council then followed up
with its infamous "corruption report" which offered a thorough and
detailed evaluation, indicating weaknesses, malfunction, and sometimes
outright fraud. This report was widely published and debated in forums,
newspapers and other public venues. In the end, the open public debate
led to the resignation of that cabinet and a reshuffle--although the
changes did not necessarily allow for serious reform and correction of
the problems that had been reviewed by the Legislative Council.

Later, quiet but efficient pressure began to come from the donor
community, particularly from Europe. This pressure was doled out in a
constructive manner, to try to convince the Palestinian Authority to
initiate a reform process. The big push came only when the United States
adopted a pointed negative political attitude towards the Palestinian
Authority and began to promote the idea of "regime change" in Palestine.
The United States then began to use the issue of corruption as a tool
with which to attack the Palestinian Authority, thus manipulating calls
for reform in order to bring about political change. The Americans had a
set political agenda and they were ready to use any means, including the
case for reform, to pursue that agenda. The most cynical analysis would
point today to the ongoing allegations of corruption against
high-ranking members of the Israeli government and the deafening silence
from the international community on those charges.

All of these factors materialized in the now-famous speech of President
Yasser Arafat before the Legislative Council in May 2002. In that
speech, the president admitted mistakes, took responsibility for them,
and promised change in the future. Then he ordered a cabinet reshuffle
that included new faces. One outcome of this new cabinet was the "one
hundred day program for reform" and a ministerial reform committee that
produced some positive results.

Still, the charge of corruption remains a major means of "managing" this
political conflict on the part of the Americans and Israelis. Just look
at the issue of elections. In his important June 2002 policy speech,
President George W. Bush declared that Palestinian elections would be
held in six months. His motives were to counteract a successful Israeli
campaign of discrediting the Palestinian Authority by restoring the
confidence of the Palestinian public. Not knowing enough about
Palestinian internal affairs, the Americans assumed that elections would
also lead to a change in the Palestinian leadership, thus furthering
their own stated interests. It was not long before Israel advised the US
that elections would only renew the leadership of President Arafat and
suddenly, the Americans were opposing their own policy.

Palestinians have not been able to ignore this manipulation of what, for
them, is a real and urgent concern. It is very interesting to note that
even as the United States and Israel have used the issue of reform to
further their own political interests, Palestinians have pursued a
reform agenda on their own terms as a means of enhancing and improving
the political position of the Palestinian Authority and their
leadership, for the benefit of both the Palestinian public and the
international community. For Palestinians, reform has been a means of
showing faith in their chosen leaders.

The conclusion here is that different parties approach corruption in
different ways. Some of them, including Israel and the United States,
have been manipulating the issue of corruption and its solutions in
order to pursue specific political agendas, while others, among them
Palestinian groups in power (such as the Legislative Council and certain
political figures), the Palestinian opposition and local civil society,
European Union bodies and independent organizations, have approached the
issue of corruption and reform with a genuine reform agenda.

A great deal has been achieved in the Palestinian Authority to arrive at
a nearly complete end to financial corruption and a fruitful and
promising process of reforming other aspects of the judiciary and the
civil service. Unfortunately, this process has been stunted by the
continuation of Israel's reoccupation of Palestinian cities and the
subsequent economic deterioration resulting from Israel's collective
punishment.

