My gut feeling tells me that when United States President George W. Bush
wakes up in the morning and gets his daily foreign policy briefing from
Condoleeza Rice, his immediate reaction to news from the Middle East is
thus: "To hell with both the Arabs and the Israelis. I just wish the
bastards would finally get themselves together and fade away." (The
president's words are likely to be much choicer than these, of course).

My guess is that the president has no kind feelings towards either
Palestinian President Yasser Arafat or Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon. Nor does he probably have much respect for the various Arab
leaders he must engage.

Nevertheless, as much as the US administration has tried to avoid it,
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict keeps forcing itself forward. The
Americans would rather focus on their "war on terrorism," scoring one
"victory" after another, and in the process promoting American imperial
power as never before. The conflict is perceived as a no-win situation
for any American president. Remember how hard former president Clinton
"tried" and how much time he "invested," only to be rebuffed? Bush is
not about to repeat the same mistake.

But Bush is being pressured to get involved by his Arab allies, who are
in desperate straits and whose own survival as corrupt regimes is now in
question as a result of the Palestinian Intifada and its brutal handling
by the Israeli government. Furthermore, no matter how hard American
politicians and commentators try to avoid a link between Israel's
behavior and American policy in the region, on the one hand, and the
growth of severe alienation that spawns anti-American acts of terror on
the other hand, the very intensity of the conflict keeps reminding the
world that there is, indeed, a connection.

If, therefore, it is impossible to tackle a problem in a substantive
way, one can at least offer a nod toward symbolic politics. One can try
to remove the problem from the television screens and front pages of the
newspapers. One can try to reshape perceptions and get the parties to
"reduce violence" and engage in some kind of "peace process"--albeit,
one probably leading nowhere. And one can mount a major public relations
campaign by sending your foreign-service officers who speak broken
Arabic to appear on television to better explain the American position.

After Colin Powell's speech, these emissaries have quite a bit more
ammunition. Americans will now be presented to the world, not only as
warriors who condone atrocities by their Northern Alliance friends and
mercilessly bomb miserable Afghani civilians, but also as noble
peacemakers.

There are currently many objective conditions, on the level of American
and even Israeli public opinion, which might enable the American
government to push for a fair settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. But I am reasonably sure that President Bush and his
administration lack the courage and will to confront the Israeli
government and to push it toward meaningful compromise. They are not
willing to incur that confrontation's political cost. Further, in
Israel, there is no anchor for an American initiative--foreign minister
Shimon Peres cannot offer it and the Labor party is in disarray. .

Despite these negatives, Palestinians must engage in the new process in
an intelligent and proactive manner. To be taken seriously, Palestinians
must address their severe internal problems--eliminate rampant
corruption, establish a system of law and invest in the welfare and
education of their people. At the same time, Palestinians must mount an
effective, coordinated and well-focused campaign aimed at reaching
important segments of the American and Israeli public.

After all, Secretary Powell has articulated what Palestinians have been
calling for: namely, a viable Palestinian state alongside Israel, an end
to the occupation and settlements, an end to the killing of innocent men
and women, and an end to the closures that have turned daily life into
hell for the Palestinian people. These are important objectives for
Palestinians to focus on and of which to repeatedly remind the United
States administration.

