In outlining the effects of the ongoing sequence of events since
September 2000 on Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, one
needs to be careful in specifying exactly what is impacting what, rather
than dealing with the effects in isolation from their causes. This is
necessary to avoid falling into the trap of blaming the victim, a
phenomenon that is a characteristic of much of the current uncritical
political narrative.

Therefore, when comparing the socioeconomic situation as it existed
previously to the current situation, we need to remind ourselves that
the underlying cause of the dramatic deterioration is not the intifada
as such, but the policies adopted by successive Israeli governments to
crush the intifada and thwart its aims. The basic aims of the second
intifada (like those of the first) were not more extensive than ending
the occupation and all that has come with it: colonial settlement
building on stolen land engulfing Palestinian population centers; daily
humiliation; obstruction of the autonomous development of Palestinian
society; and, in short, standing in the way of Palestinians exercising
their right to self-determination.

A central element of the Israeli government's strategy of crushing the
intifada consists of subjecting the population to extreme economic
hardship. This has been implemented through a series of measures. First,
Israel has closed to Palestinian labor the Israeli labor market, which
before the intifada employed a quarter of the Palestinian labor force.
Second, the Israeli government has fragmented Palestinian society by
blockading its towns, villages and camps, thus making it impossible--or
at best extremely difficult--for labor and commodities to move from one
area to another. Third, the Israeli government has demolished the
Palestinian Authority's (PA) central institutions and the minor symbols
of sovereignty that the PA brought with it. This was accomplished by
withholding from the PA its financial dues and systematically destroying
its material and institutional infrastructure.

The results are that unemployment rates have jumped from about 10
percent just before the eruption of the intifada to five or six times
that rate (depending on what definition one uses for employment).
Consequently, the poverty rate--which is set by the World Bank at $2 per
day per person--shot up from 20 percent in 1999 to about 50 percent
towards the end of 2002, and is likely to keep rising as savings and
other resources are exhausted. Poverty is what the future holds for most
people as both the public and private sectors are weakened and their
resources used up. Losses in the private sector have been enormous both
in terms of productive capacity (and thus employment capacity) and in
terms of investments, both local and external.

The Palestinian public sector was heavily hit as its tax revenues
dwindled to half their pre-intifada level and as donor assistance began
to fall off. The ability of the PA to provide basic services (education,
health, personal security and social assistance) has received a very
hard knock on the head. The result of all this has been rapidly
declining standards of living, increasing poverty and the rapid spread
of malnutrition and anemia, particularly among children, the elderly and
women. The PA's monthly scrambling to pay the salaries of its employees
(including teachers, policemen and health workers) adds to individual
families' feelings of insecurity and duress. This is further enhanced by
the military reoccupation of most Palestinian areas and daily sorties
against the civilian population (assassinations, arrests, house
demolition, curfews, etc.). All this makes Palestinian society a very
"high risk society."

The Israeli strategy under the Sharon government to use the maximum
possible economic, political, military and security pressures to quell
the intifada has succeeded in creating untold suffering and misery among
the Palestinian civilian population, but has also failed miserably to
address the roots of the intifada--the Israeli military occupation,
colonization and apartheid policies. There is sufficient evidence in
history to show that repression, starvation and humiliation do not stop
people from dreaming of their freedom or diminish their readiness to die
for it.

