Q: Who started the intifada?

A: However you wish to twist and turn it, the fact that there is
an Israeli occupation of Palestinian land is sufficient to understand
why there is violence between Palestinians and Israelis. The Israeli
occupation has become more and more entrenched in the Palestinian
territories and a variety of atrocities have been committed against
Palestinians. Thousands of Palestinians have been imprisoned;
Palestinian infrastructure, whether official or private, has been
destroyed; over the years tens of thousands of Palestinians have been
killed; and even more have been injured.

During the seven years of the Oslo process there were two conflicting
tendencies within Palestinian society. On the one hand, Palestinians
were thirsty for some peace and calm and for getting the occupation off
their backs. On the other hand, people witnessed that even during times
of negotiations, settlement building continued, indeed skyrocketed;
Palestinian land continued to be confiscated; checkpoints, meant to
hamper Palestinian lives and livelihoods, were erected; and the measures
of successive Israeli governments only tightened the noose further
around the necks of Palestinians economically, socially and
psychologically.

Given these tendencies, Palestinians were hoping that the Camp David
talks in July 2000 would resolve the conflict once and for all. In their
minds, the late President Yasser Arafat, the symbol of the Palestinian
struggle, went to Camp David with a genuine desire to resolve the
conflict with Ehud Barak and in the presence of Bill Clinton. However,
both the American administration and the Israeli government were
tenacious in their attempts to impose a variety of pressures and
conditions on the Palestinian leadership. Arafat did not yield.

Q: So the failure of Camp David was the principal catalyst?

Following the failure and the collapse of the talks there was a
transitional period of sorts in Palestinian society. That transitional
phase was characterized by a rise in the degree of accumulated
frustration in the Palestinian psyche vis-a-vis the practices of the
Israeli occupation. That is, Palestinians felt and saw Camp David as
evidence that the Israelis were not interested in a settlement to the
conflict based on negotiations.

It was in this tense atmosphere that Sharon, with his violation of the
sanctity of the Aqsa Mosque on September 28, 2000, became the straw that
broke the camel's back. Palestinians felt there was no other way to
react--negotiations had failed, the occupation continued unabated as did
Israeli assaults on Palestinian land and holy places--than to take to
the streets. The outbreak of the Aqsa intifada is a byproduct of years
of failed negotiations and accumulating frustrations within Palestinian
society due to the ongoing atrocities and brutalities by the Israeli
occupation under cover of the peace process. It was, if you will, an
almost inevitable outcome given the fact that the political process did
not work, and the Israeli occupation showed no signs of ending.

Q: There is a suggestion that perhaps the demonstrations
could have been reigned in early in time for the Clinton proposals and
the Taba negotiations.

A: At the start of the intifada, two schools of thought evolved.
The first saw the intifada as a tool for moving negotiations forward.
Certainly, among Israelis, Barak saw the intifada in this context. He
looked back to what happened during Netanyahu's time when the tunnel
upheavals only signified a pause. Barak perhaps calculated that after
some violence, the Palestinians would come back to the negotiating table
and everything would return to normal in time for the Israeli elections.
Clinton certainly wanted developments to go that way, in his quest to go
down in history as the peacemaker between Israelis and Palestinians.
Some Palestinians also adopted these views and looked at the intifada as
only a means to move the political process forward.

The second school of thought, however, really viewed the intifada as a
process of national liberation to end the occupation. For the first few
months, at least six months, Palestinians were concentrating their
efforts on peaceful resistance to the occupation, in a replica of the
first intifada. However, the ferocity of the Israeli response, the
killing of so many Palestinians, not only in the West Bank, Jerusalem
and the Gaza Strip, but also within the 1948 areas, was a signal to
Palestinians that perhaps some fundamental and profound changes would
have to be made in the way the occupation should be resisted. Therefore
there was a gradual progression in the means and tools utilized.

In the longer view it was like this: first there were negotiations
followed by stone throwing protests. These didn't work, indeed, only
more and more Palestinians were killed. Had the Israeli occupation dealt
with these demonstrations in a "civilized" way--as civilized as is
possible for a belligerent military occupying power--Palestinians would
have continued to rely on such means. But the Israeli presence in
occupied territory had changed in nature and policy, and having to seek
out checkpoints and go to them was very costly in terms of lives. So we
saw a gradual progression from random shootings at settlements, to
bombings, to suicide bombings, to homemade rockets and, more recently,
the tunnel attacks. Such a progression, I believe, was really
unavoidable. And, resorting to a military resistance, even with the
modest means available to them, Palestinians have compensated the gross
inequity in the military balance of power with a strategic balance of
terror.

Q: How important is resolving the debate over who started
the intifada?

A: It is important for academic reasons, of course, but, quite
frankly, any observer who follows the conflict is bound to realize that
given the fact that there is occupation and the resulting brutal
atrocities against Palestinians, it is only natural that there are
intifadas, that there is violence, and that there are acts of violence.
The occupation is the incubator of violence. The only way out is to work
diligently to end the occupation. This is not only useful for
Palestinians, it is useful for Israelis, because it will rid them of
this inhuman stigma that has attached itself to their institutions. It
will also be good for humanity at large, because in the 21st century to
have a military occupation by one people over another people is a most
barbaric and backward way of conducting your affairs.

