Judging by the economic indicators, Yasir Arafat and his colleagues in
the Palestinian leadership plainly did not plan in advance or even
anticipate the outbreak of the bloody confrontations that came to be
known as the al-Aqsa Intifada. The most striking indicator is the
billions of dollars invested by the Palestinians in tourism enterprises
toward the year 2000--the year that produced the Intifada.

In the ambitious "Bethlehem 2000" project alone that climaxed in the
visit of the Pope to Bethlehem, more than two billion dollars were
invested. New and luxurious hotels were built in the city of Jesus's
birth, along with a modern bus terminal and a conference center;
infrastructure for various services was installed and hospitality and
entertainment centers were opened. Similar investments in tourist
projects were made in Jericho, Ramallah and even Gaza. A large portion
of the funding for these projects came from external sources, from the
countries that contributed to the Palestinian Authority. But large
private and public investments were also made by the Palestinians
themselves.

Needless to say, the tourism industry is the most sensitive of all to
security events. In other words, whoever invests such huge sums in
tourism not only is not planning violent events, but indeed does not
even imagine that something like a war is about to break out. Thus we
can state unequivocally that the economy of the Palestinian Authority in
its short duration (1994-2000) was built as a peace economy.

There are other aspects of the Palestinian economy that offer an
explanation of sorts for the outbreak of the Intifada. A brief survey of
the development of the Palestinian economy should also explain why so
much attention is now being paid to the corruption rampant within
Palestinian institutions.

The Oslo agreement of September 1993 was signed at a time when a degree
of separation was developing between the Palestinian economy in the West
Bank and Gaza and the Israeli economy. Following the Israeli occupation
of the territories, and in the course of over 20 years, near total
integration was instituted between the economies of the Palestinian
territories and Israel. Relations between the small and relatively
backward Palestinian economy and Israel's large and modern economy were
completely asymmetrical.

It was Israel's minister of defense during the 1967 war, Moshe Dayan,
who presided over the process of integrating the two economies, based on
the free passage of goods between them. This generated the near total
dependency of the Palestinian economy on that of Israel. Its main
feature was the employment in Israel of half the Palestinian work force.
Masses of laborers from the Gazan refugee camps and the villages of
Judea and Samaria commuted daily to Israel to work in construction,
agriculture, services and industry. This generated a process of rapid
economic growth in the West Bank and Gaza. In 1986, some 20 years after
the territories were occupied, Palestinian per capita income had reached
22 percent of that in Israel. In other words the Palestinians' economic
situation, relative to Israel's, increased significantly during these
years, and their income began to close the gap with incomes in Israel.

It was in the course of the crisis generated by the Gulf War of early
1991 that closures were first imposed on the territories. But the
dramatic change in the relationship between the economy of the
territories and that of Israel came about with the Oslo Agreement and
the establishment of Palestinian autonomy. Palestinian laborers could no
longer enter Israel freely. Closure became a permanent matter of
principle. Instead of integration between the two economies, rules of
economic separation were developed against a backdrop that was both
political and security-motivated.

The establishment of Palestinian rule on the West Bank and in Gaza was
accompanied by great expectations for economic growth. The ensuing
disappointment was equally great. Separation from Israel through closure
generated high rates of Palestinian unemployment. Tens of thousands of
Palestinian workers stood beyond the fences and the roadblocks and
pondered how the peace process had created a situation whereby guest
workers from Rumania, China and Thailand were taking their places.

Following the Oslo Agreement, large sums of money flowed to the
Palestinian Authority to finance national projects involving tourism,
communications industries, an airport at Rafah, the first stages of
constructing a seaport at Gaza, and offshore gas production. But this
could not replace sources of employment in Israel. Only the Palestinian
ruling elite benefited financially. Senior PA officials also received
benefits from Israel: free passage at roadblocks and concessions for
advancing commercial projects and monopolies.

The Gazan and West Bank lower classes became poorer and poorer. In 1998,
four years after Palestinian rule was established, per capita income in
the PA had dropped back to a low of 10 percent vis-a-vis that in Israel.
The Palestinian economy had been set back some 20 years.

Widespread instances of corruption and waste within PA institutions also
emerged. Even more important was the impression that these phenomena
made on the masses of unemployed and poor. A critical crisis of
confidence developed between them and the ruling elite. Bitterness and
jealousy generated endless stories and gossip about the luxurious life
of those enjoying the privileges of rule at the expense of the suffering
of the masses. These socioeconomic circumstances played a key role in
the outbreak of the Intifada, and continue to exercise decisive
influence on the widespread demands for reform and elimination of
corruption within the ruling institutions of the Palestinian
Authority.

