Q: What is the meaning of UNGAR 194?

A: It's very clear what the meaning of UNGAR 194
                                            is and there has been little
controversy over its meaning except among legal experts and politicians
on the Israeli side who have been trying to reinterpret it. But
generally there is consensus among the expert community and the
international community what UNGAR 194 means. It affirms the right of
those refugees who wish to return to return to their homes and
properties and receive compensation, and for those who do not wish to
return to have the option of resettlement and compensation elsewhere.

This is very much in line with the principles that are usually applied
to solving refugee problems the world over. In that sense, UNGAR 194 is
nothing exceptional. It is very much in line with principles applied in
peace agreements especially recent peace agreements. The fact that we
have these ongoing arguments over what this resolution and what the
right of return means I see more as a way to try to avoid the real issues.

Q: One of the reasons people say UNGAR 194 does not imply
the right of return is because it is not explicitly stated in there.
Where does the right come in?

A: The resolution states that refugees who wish to return should
have the possibility of doing so and basically affirms existing
international law. General Assembly resolutions don't establish rights;
they are passed based on existing international law. This is what UNGAR
194 does. It affirms that refugees who wish--and here we have the issue
of the choice which is very important--should be able to return and
those who do not should be offered other options. The fact that it does
not state the right per se is meaningless.

Q: The right of return has often been portrayed as a deal
breaker in terms of a Palestinian-Israeli peace agreement. What are your
thoughts on that?

A: Two things here. First of all, and unfortunately, I think we
have never reached a stage in peace negotiations where everything was
resolved except for the right of return of the refugees. So in that
sense you cannot call it a deal breaker because there are still many
other issues that people say are so easily resolved--the settlements,
sovereignty--where we haven't seen any negotiated solutions yet. So it
may be a little premature to declare this issue as a deal breaker.

On the other hand, it is maybe the most substantial question, because it
does not fit into the framework of separating Palestinian Arabs and
Israeli Jews on territorial lines. Palestinian refugee rights are not
situated in the 1967 occupied territories. In that sense it is
particularly challenging because it is maybe the one issue where major
concessions are required from the Israeli side so that an Israel after a
peace agreement couldn't be the same as the Israel we have now.

Q: Israelis say the fulfillment of the right of return
would mean the end of Israel as a Jewish state. What would you say to them?

A: I think what we really need is a discussion over the solution
of the refugee issue as an issue of conflicting rights. Instead of
always arguing over whether Palestinian refugees have a right of return
or not, we should look at the rights they have--which is the right to
return to housing and property, restitution and compensation--and look
on the Israeli side and see what kind of rights we have there. We have
to look at the right of Israel to be a Jewish state, which is situated
on the level of collective rights, if there is one, i.e. whether Israel
in fact under international law has a right to maintain a Jewish state.
And we have to look at the level of individual rights, the rights of
Israeli Jews who have been living on refugee property for so many years
under specific conditions, and maybe have invested and have ownership
etc. These are the things you normally look at in other refugee cases
and conflicts where refugees return. You have to ask what are the rights
on both sides, and then these have to be balanced. This is where we have
compromises, not on the level of the rights per se.

Q: In recent years we have seen a number of unofficial
peace initiatives--the Geneva Accords or the Nusseibeh-Ayalon
agreement--in which it seems the right of Palestinian refugees to return
have been seriously compromised. What is your position on such efforts?

A: The problem with these proposals is that they suggest a
political deal that should be made by the leaderships on both sides, and
in both cases, refugee rights, which are individual rights, are
massively ignored and violated. In that sense they are extremely
problematic, and there is probably no Palestinian leadership, which
wants to remain legitimate, that could pass such a deal. Nor is it not
the way refugee problems have been resolved in other cases. This is why
I think it is so important to look at comparative studies and learn from
other experiences. If there is a serious approach to resolving this
issue, of course we will benefit from the experience of other regions
and cases.

The problem with the Israeli side is that there has been an effort to
block even debates on this level and to just keep arguing over whether
Palestinian refugees have rights or not. It is more comfortable to
propose deals where these rights are either put away by political
decision--Nusseibeh-Ayalon--or interpreted in such a way that they
become meaningless, and this won't lead anywhere.

Q: There are also those who argue that Palestinians have to
make a choice between the right of return or the two-state solution.
What do you think?

A: It's a very hypothetical question. So far we haven't seen in
past negotiations an Israeli government that explicitly said it was for
a two-state solution and for a Palestinian state, and all the activities
on the ground have always suggested the opposite. How should
Palestinians make these choices, when it's so abstract? If the situation
in the Oslo years had developed in such a way that both sides had agreed
to a sovereign state of Palestine in the 1967 occupied territories, and
settlements had been frozen and gradually dismantled, then maybe there
would have been a Palestinian leadership that could legitimately and
with popular support have made a deal on refugee rights. But since we
never had such a situation, it is very abstract to even think of such
scenarios. What kind of guarantees do people have that if they give up
their right of return they will have a sovereign state?

Q: Assuming the right of return is not going to be
implemented any time soon, what should be done in the short term? For
example, could there be an international community decision to resettle
people and pay compensation without prejudicing their possible future
statuses?

A: There are lots of things that could be done in the meantime.
There are two things in particular that are very obvious and would be
very helpful.

The first is if the whole current international system of refugee
protection was reviewed and improved when it comes to Palestinian
refuges. We have a situation where Palestinians are very much left out
of the international protection system that was set up under the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR). Palestinian refugees
need an agency that is not only providing assistance the way the United
Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA) does, but an agency that
protects refugee rights, on both levels, day-to-day legal rights, and
rights in the framework of a durable solution. This is something that
from today people can work on and where they can make a big difference
when it comes to both the current situation of refugees but also in
building stronger support for refugee rights when the scenario arises
where we have political negotiations again.

The second issue where I think a lot of work can be done now is to
really make an effort to engage--and this initiative has to come very
much from the Palestinian side--to engage Israelis, not necessarily on
the level of policy makers and government, but on the level of civil
society institutions and academia, in this debate over conflicting
rights. It is not helpful to keep arguing this black and white scenario:
that either there is a right of return that means over 5 million
Palestinian refugees will flood Israel, or no right of return at all and
the Jewish state has all the right to maintain demographic and property
relations as they are now. Such a black and white scenario is not
helpful.

