While most of the local and international attention on the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict concentrates on its most sensational and
dramatic aspects--the killing, the destruction, and the impressive
military hardware--there have been many more subtle but significant
changes underway. It is these less attention-grabbing shifts that could,
in the end, have the most dangerous long-term consequences.

As a community, Palestinians were once proud of being highly educated by
regional standards. Probably as a result of their historical
experiences, they have always concentrated on making up for their
immediate losses, be they political or economic, by concentrating on
getting a good education as a way of offering the younger generation
more opportunity, despite persistent economic and political deprivation.

But, in just one example of how the current crisis is actually changing
the fabric of Palestinian society and the ideals it holds dear,
Palestinians are increasingly finding it impossible to pursue education
for themselves and their children. The last two years have introduced
Israeli practices like the insidious restrictions on movement and
prolonged curfews that have lowered the level of education and in some
cases put it entirely out of reach. Some 300 school pupils have been
killed during this time alone. While an aggravating frustration for
Palestinians now, this reality is also going to have long-term negative
effects on the future of our people--economically, culturally and, no
doubt, politically.

The economic deterioration that leaves 50 percent of the labor force
unemployed and another 25 percent unable to get to their place of work
(and therefore without wages); the widespread destitution that has over
half of the population below the poverty line; and the physical
destruction of vital Palestinian support infrastructure have all
contributed further to long-lasting changes in Palestinian society that
cannot be conducive to either immediate or long-term reconciliation.
Poverty, disenfranchisement and reduced education are the stomping
grounds of extremism, anger and radicalization.

There is no doubt that this radicalization process, brought on by
violence, humiliation, the incredible wasteland of political prospects
and a freefalling standard of living, is deeply affecting us. Every day
that passes sees a subtle shift in the balance of power among the
various strata of Palestinian society; that balance is increasingly in
favor of the least moderate, the most angry and the infallibly extremist.

In Palestine, the secular sectors of society were historically the
political supporters of the peace process, while the camp opposing the
negotiations came mostly from the right wing and held to religious
fundamentalist ideology. As such, the failure of the peace process and
the subsequent ongoing violence has weakened both the peace camp, which
might be expected, but also the secular majority in Palestinian society.
That change will have immeasurable negative long-term consequences on
the Palestinian community and the direction of its future development.

As such, while the visible and immediate effects of the conflict might
be characterized by violence and the lack of any political progress
right now, the long-term effects of deep socioeconomic change could
contribute to prolonging the political conflict and make it more
difficult to deliver the public to peace and reconciliation in the
future. Those pundits and officials who think international intervention
is impossible and that Palestinians and Israelis just need more time to
tire of this conflict should be reminded of that.

