There is no doubt that the outbreak of violence between Israelis and
Palestinians in September 2000 was related directly or indirectly to the
collapse of the peace process after the failure of the Camp David final
status summit.

But it would be a mistake to see the start of the Aqsa intifada as
something that happened in the context only of this failure. The Oslo
process was meant to usher in a period of non-peace/non-war to enable
the settling of the core issues between the sides. But it is difficult
to imagine such a situation holding too long in a conflict like the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, simply because the Israeli occupation is a
continuous act of aggression and oppression that invites rejection and
resistance.

It is important to note that before the outbreak of confrontations that
September there had not been any act of Palestinian violence against
Israelis in the four preceding years, as was pointed out then by Israeli
journalist Danny Rubinstein. One might add that these four years without
violence were the only such period of extended calm since the beginning
of the Israeli occupation in 1967.

Israel has recently succeeded in creating the impression--the false
impression--that the confrontations are about Palestinian-initiated
violence and Israeli reaction. If one goes back to the beginning of this
phase, however, and looks into the details of those events the opposite
conclusion must be drawn.

The first bloody day of this phase came the day after then Israeli
opposition leader Ariel Sharon's provocative visit to the Aqsa Mosque
surrounded by some 1,500 security personnel and policemen. Palestinian
protests were met with draconian violence by the Israeli security
forces, and seven Palestinians were killed in or around the Aqsa Mosque
in Jerusalem. That set the pattern for the first few weeks of the
intifada. Popular, unarmed demonstrations were met with extreme
violence, and the record shows that for the first ten days of the
intifada an average of ten Palestinians were killed each day, with
almost no casualties on the other side. There were also 13 casualties in
one day, not in Gaza, Nablus or Jenin, but among Palestinian youth in
the Galilee and Palestinian-Israeli towns during demonstrations in
solidarity with their brethren in the West Bank and Gaza.

The first Palestinian suicide bombing did not come until six months
later, and in the following months and years the confrontations started
to gain their own dynamic. A cycle was born, a chain of action and
reaction whereby specifying cause and effect became less and less
intelligible. It is always important to remember, however, that this
cycle took place, and continues to take place, in the context of an
illegal, military and belligerent Israeli occupation of Palestinian land.

The events of September 11 also provided Israel an opportunity to
classify these confrontations as part of the war between the civilized
world and terrorism. It is a public relations tactic that seems to have
succeeded and allowed Israel to continue its path of uncompromising and
unilateral action. This is unfortunate, when the main lesson that should
have been learned so far is that there is no way Palestinians can live
peacefully while living under occupation. The means employed in the war
between occupied and occupiers can change, and sometimes they may be
perceived as legitimate and at other times as illegitimate. But at all
times, the occupation--especially as it is accompanied by ever-expanding
illegal Jewish settlement on Palestinian land aimed at consolidating
this occupation--will always cause resistance, violence and confrontation.

Meanwhile, all the debates about what's right and what's wrong, who's
right and who's wrong, who started and who reacted will not contribute
to ending the conflict and the violence. Only ending the occupation, or
embarking upon a political process that will create a real impression
among Palestinians of a possible peaceful end to the occupation, can
stop the confrontational relations between the two sides.

