The Geneva Accord                                                between
Yossi Beilin and Yasser Abed Rabbo and their colleagues signals the
public on both sides that peace is possible. It is a courageous act, and
a positive major event in the annals of the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process. On the Israeli side it might constitute at least a partial
turning point in the sad fortunes of the political left. The Palestinian
moderate camp, too, now has ammunition for persuading the public that
peace is possible--if Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat allows it to happen.

One key difficulty with what we have been shown of the Geneva agreement
(note that important annexes and entire clauses on key issues like water
are missing) is not with the idea, but with the premises, at least from
the Israeli standpoint. Beilin and his team make no secret of their
strategy of picking up where the Taba talks of January 2001 left off. As
an apparent consequence, the agreement seems to ignore too many of the
lessons that should have been drawn from the tragic events of the past
three years. The results are evident in the clauses of the agreement
that deal with territory, security, refugees and Palestinian recognition
of Israel as a Jewish state:

    * Beilin is right not to annex settlements, even large ones like
      Ariel, if annexation would render them hard to defend. But the
      result is the evacuation of over 100,000 settlers, whereas at Camp
      David/Taba the agreed premise was the evacuation of around 60,000.
      What conceivable Israeli government will evacuate over 100,000?
      Better to annex as many settlements as possible, rather than as
      few as possible, with sufficient territory to defend them, and at
      least examine the option of compensating the Palestinian state
      (generously, in territorial terms) with Israeli Arab towns in the
      Triangle and Wadi Ara areas, thereby also addressing Israel's long
      term demographic needs and confronting the ongoing radicalization
      of Israeli Arab society. The parties never discussed this option.

    * As reflected in the Geneva agreements, Israel's security demands
      for a short-term military presence in the Jordan Valley and a
      virtual or invisible presence at border crossings are no more
      exacting than they were three years ago. Yet the past three years
      have dramatically demonstrated Palestinian intentions and
      capabilities for smuggling in and home-producing weaponry for use
      against Israel. The upshot should have been a dramatically tougher
      Israeli position on these security issues. Instead it is an
      expanded international presence.

    * While Geneva is happily devoid of any mention of the right of
      return or the origins of the refugee issue, it still does not
      reflect the near consensus in Israel that one key lesson of the
      past three years is to avoid absorbing any refugees at all or in
      any way even implying recognition of the right of return.
      Palestinians will almost certainly interpret Beilin's acceptance
      of United Nations General Assembly Resolution 194
                                                  and his readiness to
      absorb refugees (a process no longer termed "family
      reunification", with numbers to be determined at least partially
      not by Israel but through a link to the willingness of third
      countries like Australia to absorb refugees) as acknowledgment of
      the right of return--thereby leaving open the door for future
      attempts to raise the issue and "Palestinize" Israel. True, this
      agreement does end Palestinian refugee status and rules out any
      further claims. But the Ayalon-Nusseibeh formulation
                                                     that "Palestinian
      refugees will return only to the State of Palestine" is far
      preferable from this standpoint. And where in Geneva are the
      provisions for Jewish refugees from Arab states that were agreed
      on at Camp David?

    * This brings us to the issue of Israel's right to exist as a Jewish
      state--a key demand that has been reinforced over the past three
      years by the perception that the Palestinian leadership's
      inability to mouth this phrase is linked to its pursuit of a
      terrorist agenda and its rejection of the two state peace option.
      On the one hand, according to Geneva, "this agreement marks the
      recognition of the right of the Jewish people to statehood..." Yet
      on the other, "The Parties recognize Palestine and Israel as the
      homelands of their respective peoples." In other words, even in
      this agreement the Palestinians do not quite recognize Israel as
      the homeland of the Jewish people, since Israel's "people" could
      in Palestinian eyes be Palestinians and the Jews' right to
      statehood does not necessarily apply to the territory of Israel.
      If this sounds like quibbling, it seems clear that the parties to
      Geneva quibbled over the wording regarding this and the refugee
      issue at considerable length, and that the Palestinian side
      emerged with wording that does not necessarily close its "Israel
      file" for the future. Again, compare Nusseibeh-Ayalon: "Israel is
the only state of the Jewish people."

At the conceptual level, Geneva is based on an Israeli assumption that
the parties are capable of delivering and are likely to produce leaders
interested in an agreement like this, which is intended to ensure
Israel's long term survival as a Jewish and democratic state. Otherwise,
why bother? Despite my objections, if the agreement were presented to me
on a take-it-or-leave-it basis in a national referendum, I would vote
for it--because it is a good agreement, and because nearly any agreement
is better than the future that confronts us: the virtual collapse of the
two state solution and the South Africanization of our conflict. Yet in
our reality of disastrous leadership and prolonged conflict, no such
referendum is likely.

So how do we keep off this disastrous slippery slope of geography
(settlements) and demography? With all due respect to the Geneva Accord,
we had best also invest our energies in alternative ways, like
unilateral withdrawal.

