With the eruption of the confrontations in September 2000 and the
subsequent tight closures of the Palestinian territories, the slim and
unsustainable recovery begun by the Palestinian economy in 1998 came to
an abrupt halt. In the 20 or so months since then, the economy has been
decimated. The Israeli economy has also been negatively affected,
although unlike that of Palestinians, it is far ahead of barely surviving.

Does Israel want a proletariat revolution in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip and against whom? Is the Israeli objective to test the accuracy of
modern weapons against suburban revolutions as Alain Joxe suggested in
his May 19 lecture, "Countering Israel's role in the strategy of
hegemony," at Birzeit University? Or are mere security concerns on the
minds of the Israeli government?

The economic war waged against the Palestinian people is part of
Israel's military and political war aimed at tiring Palestinians and
bringing them to their knees. In the words of Israeli commentator for
Yedioth Ahranot Ron Ben Eshai, "It is impossible to vanquish the Al Aqsa
Intifada military, but it is definitely possible to frustrate it and to
wear out the Palestinians physically and economically until it dies out."

The strict land, sea and air blockade imposed on the 1967 Palestinian
territories and between all Palestinian cities and villages is placing a
stranglehold on the economy and its future prospects. The closure
prevents 125,000 day laborers from getting to their jobs in Israeli
markets. The resulting daily losses in remittances have been estimated
at $3.4 million dollars, which removes a principal source of income for
the Palestinian National Authority (PNA). In 1999, those 125,000 workers
contributed $1.3 billion dollars to the Gross National Product - a
fourth of the total. The World Bank estimates the total loss in
Palestinian GNP at $2.4 billion in real terms from September of 2000
until the end of December 2001.

In addition, more than 200,000 workers in the domestic economy are now
unable to go to work due to the closure of roads between Palestinian
towns. Even those who can get to work have not maintained the same level
of contracts, wages or salaries. The percentage of unemployment in the
occupied territories ranges between 40 to 50 percent, making the very
concept irrelevant. The ratio of poverty in these areas is now
unprecedented. The World Bank speaks of 1.5 million people living below
the poverty line of two dollars a day.

This mounts to pauperizing the masses. Workers are thriving to survive
under unbelievable conditions of suffocation. The result is obvious:
continuous violence. The reaction is obvious: armed incursion and heavy
military response for what Israel proudly calls the "destruction of
terror infrastructure." It is a vicious circle.

The full blockade has virtually suspended the import of goods to the
territories from abroad (including Jordan and Egypt), and between
cities, not to mention the internal trade. Construction activities, the
leading sector in the nineties, have come to a halt. Only those
engineering firms fulfilling contracts with the PNA for a few European
Union- or Japan-funded projects still have something to do. Tourism that
was to flourish in peace is nearly dead. Those who built hotels,
restaurants and so on have lost hope. The agricultural sector has been
severely damaged, resulting in un-harvested crops and oversaturated West
Bank and Gaza Strip markets. Fishing has been banned in Gaza, depriving
hundreds of families from their main source of income.

Total losses to Palestinian infrastructure have amounted to more than
$750 million since the beginning of the confrontations.

The PNA is effectively bankrupt, since tax revenues have dwindled to one
fifth of previous levels. There is a sharp drop in PNA revenue
collections associated with declining economic activity and disrupted
tax administration, as well as Israel's suspension since December 2000
of the transfer of tax revenues collected on the PNA's behalf (over $500
million at that time) and increasing emergency expenditures,
particularly in the health sector.

The present situation is unsustainable. Households have in many cases
exhausted their savings and capacity to borrow. Emergency employment
schemes, for all their merits, have not significantly dented
unemployment. The fiscal situation continues to deteriorate, and donor
contributions have not closed the budget deficit. Up to now the PNA has
managed this deficit by borrowing from commercial banks, cutting
salaries, squeezing operating costs and delaying the payment of bills,
but all of these strategies are reaching their limit. By the end of
2001, the PNA's arrears amounted to $430 million, most of these owed to
Palestinian commercial suppliers (in turn placing significant pressure
on Palestinian commercial banks). Significant health and environmental
issues are arising with the increase in poverty.

Since the occupation in 1967, Israeli policy has continued to attempt to
bind the occupied territories to the Israeli economy, both as a source
of cheap labor and a captive market for its goods and services. The
territories make up the third biggest buyer for Israeli exports,
importing $2 billion worth of Israeli goods annually while exporting
only $250 million in exchange. Hence the renewed interest of the Israeli
and Palestinian bourgeoisie in returning to the "peace process" and
cementing the economic subjugation of the Palestinians. The continuity
of the confrontations constitutes an enormous source of danger to the
Israeli economy and its investments.

Yes, security remains the top priority on the Israeli agenda. But the
economy of confrontations tells us that squeezing Palestinians
economically is a backfiring weapon against the Israeli economy itself
inasmuch as the "war on terror" creates a vicious never-ending circle of
violence. What is left, after all, is the fact that peace can only be
achieved through genuine efforts at the negotiations table to achieve
development, so that the process of twinning peace and development can
create the social base for a long-lasting peace.

