On a winter day in February 2001, a few days after Ehud Barak's defeat
in the special elections for prime minister, I met with Yasser Abed
Rabbo, Palestinian minister for culture and information, in the /al
Quds/ editorial offices in Jerusalem's Atarot industrial park. This was
a continuation of a corridor discussion between us during the Taba
negotiations of January that year.

Abed Rabbo was convinced that the primary mistake at the Camp David
summit, where he also participated, was to raise the Jerusalem question
at the beginning of the negotiations, rather than at the end. As for
Taba, he felt that if only we had had a few more weeks, we could have
completed the framework agreement for peace.

We agreed to try and continue the effort that began at Taba--this time
informally, without obligating anyone but ourselves. We wanted to prove
to ourselves that a final agreement was feasible, to prove to the peace
camps on both sides that there is a partner and a plan. Against a
backdrop of despair, lack of faith and growing violence, we believed
that a model permanent agreement could revitalize the Israeli peace camp
(which had not even bothered to participate in the elections a few days
earlier) as well as the somnolent Palestinian peace camp.

We did not think it would take so long. Technical difficulties,
primarily prohibitions on Palestinians entering Israel and Israelis
entering areas A, and political circumstances--Palestinian governmental
crises and Israeli elections--delayed completion of the project.
Important coalitions were built on both sides: economists, intellectuals
and Fatah activists on the Palestinian side, and former security
officials, party representatives from the center and left, intellectuals
and industrialists on the Israeli side.

The Taba discussions lasted seven days. The eighth day lasted three
years. It ended in Jordan on October 12 of this year, with the signing
of a letter to Swiss Foreign Minister Micheline Calmy-Rey, to which was
attached the agreed version of the draft agreement.

The foundation of our talks was the Clinton Plan
                                               , which was accepted by
both sides, with reservations, in December 2000. Our basic assumption
was that "god is in the details," and that mere agreements in principle
are not persuasive with regard to the capacity to get to the root of
solutions. The primary package deal or trade-off was an Israeli
concession regarding Palestinian sovereignty over the Temple Mount/Harem
al Sharif, coupled with a perpetual international presence there, in
return for leaving the determination regarding acceptance of Palestinian
refugees to a sovereign Israeli decision.

We did not dwell on "narratives", mutual recriminations and assigning
responsibility for the past. We did not ask one another to forsake
dreams. We sufficed with solutions. All the question marks, all the
historical quarrels, all the United Nations decisions that we wasted
long years interpreting in our different ways--all these are answered,
resolved, and realized in the agreement we reached. It is not an easy
agreement for either side, but never has a better one been achieved. It
is offered to the decision makers on both sides; they can, if they so
desire, integrate it as phase III of the roadmap
                                                , i.e., as the final
status agreement that is to be achieved by 2005.

If there is broad support among both publics for the agreement we
reached, their respective leaderships will not be able to ignore what we
have done. Hence we are initiating a broad information campaign: an
agreement is possible; the ongoing situation of terrorism and
retribution exacts a heavy and unnecessary price from both sides and is
pointless; Israeli-Palestinian peace will bring with it economic
salvation for both peoples; it will ensure that Israel remains a Jewish
and democratic state that does not rule over another people, and will
enable the Palestinians to exercise their right to self determination.

A continuation of Israel's present policy, whereby dialogue is forbidden
until terrorism ends, awards a prize to terrorists who have no interest
in peace. Three years after Prime Minister Ariel Sharon promised
security and peace--and gave us less peace and less security--the time
has come to try a different way: the Geneva Accord
                                               offers the only practical
alternative.

