Q: UNGAR 194 "resolves that the refugees wishing to return
to their homes and live at peace with their neighbors should be
permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date". How do you address
this demand?

A: The background is the war of 1948 when the refugee problem was
created. It was a zero-sum game. What victors did to vanquished in wars
all through history was done in this war. The Arabs were victorious in
about 20 battles; they erased Jewish villages and towns, deported the
civilians and made them into refugees. The best known of those victories
were in the Etzion Bloc where four villages were destroyed and their
occupants deported, and in the Jewish Quarter of the Old City of
Jerusalem, where the victorious Arabs destroyed all the houses and some
of the most sacred synagogues and even took Jewish tombstones from the
holiest graveyard of the Jewish people, where my great great grandfather
is buried, and made them into paving stones. The Jews were victorious in
400 places. We did the same thing. We destroyed houses, some mosques,
and deported people and made them into refugees. That's the whole
terrible story in a nutshell. This war created hundreds of thousands of
refugees. I acknowledge their misery, but not the blame. This was war,
as it has been fought all over the globe and all over history.

Q: So you're citing historical precedent?

A: You can't turn back the clock of history after such a war,
because if you give the right of return you bring havoc to the whole
very delicate balance of humanity. The war of 1948 was the outcome of
the events of WWII where I was a soldier. Millions of Russian and German
refugees were deported. If you go by the right of return rule, then they
should all claim the right of return to what is now Poland, to
Koenigsberg (Kaliningrad) in eastern Prussia, to the Sudetenland in the
Czech Republic. The same goes for India and Pakistan, where millions
were deported and have no right of return. I speak as one of those who
were in charge of settling hundreds of thousands of Jewish refugees in
Israel; I built entire regions in Israel to absorb refugees. More than
half of Israelis are refugees and their children, including myself; I
arrived in Palestine at age three. Both peoples have a large refugee
proportion. We resettled them, and so can the Palestinians, with modern
technology and a Marshall Plan.

Q: Many moderate Palestinians ask that Israel accept a
small, symbolic number of Palestinian refugees.

A: The greatest symbol is a big Marshall plan for the refugees.
Accepting a symbolic few will bring only terrible envy to those not
included. This means more friction and more hatred.

Q: UNGAR 194 also resolves "that compensation should be
paid for the property of those [refugees] choosing not to return and for
loss of or damage to property". How do you view this demand for
compensation?

A: My view derives from what I said before. We don't accept blame.
The problem of the refugees was the outcome of two sides fighting each
other. There is no parallel here, say, to WWII, where the Nazis
destroyed a helpless Jewish people who were not at war with them, after
which Germany agreed to compensate the survivors.

Q: Successive Israeli governments since David Ben Gurion
have agreed to the compensation principle.

A: When Ben Gurion and others were ready for compensation they
thought this would solve the whole conflict. Since then we've had 50
years of mutual bloodshed. By the way, if each refugee gets a certain
sum in compensation it won't help to solve the problem. We need billions
of dollars.

Q: These views are very different from those of the Israeli
left of which you are a prominent member.

A: This is not entirely true. The Geneva Accord has a clause that
Israel will not bear the burden of solving the problem, but also an
outlet for a minimal number of refugees to be resettled. I oppose this.
I prefer the Nusseibeh-Ayalon program which states clearly that no
Palestinians will settle in Israel and no Jews will settle in Palestine.

Q: You are a pioneer of Israeli-Palestinian dialogue, going
all the way back to 1976 when you began talking with Issam Sartawi, a
close aide of Arafat. How do Palestinians react to your views?

A: I told Sartawi the very same thing. He and others understood
it, as does Nusseibeh today. I reject Israeli government schemes for
compensation. I prefer a big Marshall Plan, with Israeli participation.
I prefer to build modern towns with thousands of houses for refugees.

Q: Isn't this a form of collective compensation?

A: This is not collective compensation. I don't want to use the
word compensation, but rather for us to act as good neighbors, and on a
big scale, together with the West, the wealthy Arab states, etc. This
vision of a grand Marshall Plan should be put into the future agreement
between Israel and the Palestinians. It should be signed by the future
donors. It should be of a magnitude of $100 billion. This makes personal
compensation look marginal. On the other hand suppose, God forbid, the
Palestinians have their way and about two million refugees settle, say,
in Kiryat Gat, which was pre-1948 Fallujah. I built Kiryat Gat. They'll
have to deport the Jewish refugees who live there and were settled by
me. Then we have to destroy the Intel and Indigo hi-tech plants and
erase Kiryat Gat and create the new Fallujah. This means the destruction
of Israel in no time.

