The Palestinian refugees who abandoned their homes in 1948 were
casualties of a war started by the Arab world with the objective of
preventing the creation of a Jewish state. Some of the refugees fled at
their own initiative; others were, in modern parlance, ethnically
cleansed. The nascent State of Israel was fighting a war of existential
survival. It owes no apologies for its behavior in 1948.

UNGAR 194                                             was adopted in
1949 with the aim of ending the new refugee problem quickly by means of
return and compensation. When you go back and read it, it invokes a
degree of moderation: if refugees agree to "live at peace with their
[Israeli] neighbors", then they "should be permitted to do so at the
earliest practicable date". There is plenty of qualifying language here
that has enabled Israel, over the years, to insist that UNGAR 194 is not
feasible because we are still effectively at war.

The Palestinian national movement, for its part, has turned 194 into a
blatant demand that Israel accept the refugees' "right of return"--a
phrase neither mentioned nor implied in that resolution--as a condition
for peace. Hardline Palestinians argue that Israel must allow millions
of refugees to inundate the country, thereby in effect compromising its
status as a Jewish state and negating UNGAR 181, which explicitly
created "Jewish and Arab states" in Mandatory Palestine. Moderate
Palestinians insist that ways can be found to reassure Israel that only
a small portion of the refugees would actually return. But they too are
very insistent that Israel at least recognize the "right" of all
refugees to return.

In other words, for moderate Palestinians an acceptable final status
peace agreement would involve a relatively symbolic return of, say, tens
of thousands of refugees, coupled with agreed language regarding UNGAR
194 that could be understood by the Palestinian national movement as
Israeli acknowledgement of guilt, or blame, or shame, for having created
the refugee problem in the first place. Many Israelis understand this as
a demand that Palestinians be awarded psychological compensation in the
form of an Israeli admission that Israel was "born in sin"--that
Palestinians were "right" and Israel "wrong" in 1948. That is not what
UNGAR 194 is all about. That is not what Israel is all about. This
cannot and must not be the basis for peace.

This set of Palestinian demands relies on a remarkable Arab achievement
regarding the Palestinian refugees over the past 50 years. Not only has
UNGAR 194 been distorted beyond recognition in the Arab narrative, but
Palestinian refugees have been awarded their own unique UN agency, UNRWA
(United Nations Relief Works Agency), while all the rest of the world's
refugees make do with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees. Further,
statutes have been promulgated by UNRWA to ensure that refugee status is
passed on from generation to generation, to eternity. Thus the
Palestinian refugee problem grows exponentially with every passing year.
With a fifth generation of Palestinian refugees upon us, and factoring
in intermarriage between refugee and non-refugee Palestinians, we are
seemingly guaranteed that this problem will never be resolved because
virtually all Palestinians will soon be able to claim refugee and
"return" status. Nowhere else in the world has a refugee problem been
treated, or mistreated, this way.

There are a few Palestinians who recognize the absurdity of the
Palestinian right of return demands. But in the Palestinian mainstream,
generations of Palestinians have been educated on the concept that
Israel will indeed eventually recognize the right of return and
repatriate those refugees who so desire. Thus the refugee issue has
become perhaps the single most difficult obstacle to peace.

I can conceive of one possible compromise position that might somehow,
at some point, be useful in reaching agreement on the refugee issue.
Israel would reiterate categorically that it rejects the right of
return. But in the spirit of UNGAR 194, it would offer to repatriate
those original refugees, i.e., Palestinians who themselves left the
country in 1948, who wish to spend their last years in Israel and are
prepared to do so in a spirit of peace. No extended families-only the
original refugees themselves, all at least 56 years old, who would
number between a few thousand and a few tens of thousands.

Palestinians could, and hopefully would, interpret this as a
humanitarian gesture that goes to the core of their grievance. Israelis
could claim to be faithful to the original intent of UNGAR 194, without
in any way validating the Palestinian narrative regarding 1948 or the
Palestinian interpretation of UNGAR 194, both of which are antithetical
to the spirit of a genuine two state solution and to reconciliation
between the two peoples.

If we cannot invoke a compromise of this nature regarding UNGAR 194 and
the right of return, I fear we will remain far from an agreed end to
this conflict.

