The Egyptian initiative to facilitate Israel's withdrawal from the Gaza
Strip is not going to work. That is the only conclusion one can draw
after studying the demands put forward by Egyptian Minister of
Intelligence Omar Suleiman, and juxtaposing them with the known
political and security priorities of Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat.

Egypt will not be the first international actor to cut short a political
intervention initiative in the current conflict, having discovered that
it cannot work with either Sharon or Arafat since neither leader has a
viable strategy for peace or even for an end to the violence.

Beginning with Arafat, the Egyptian plan calls for the Palestinian
leader to relinquish effective authority over his dozen or so disparate
security organizations, which will then be consolidated, reorganized,
and placed under a more responsible Palestinian authority. Every
previous security plan has floundered over this issue, and so will this
one: Arafat's ongoing control over his forces is his way of staying in
power and influencing the intensity of Palestinian terrorism; as long as
he's healthy and functioning, he is not likely to concede this authority.

The Egyptian plan also calls for all Palestinian militant organizations
to agree to a ceasefire. The more extreme--Hamas, Islamic Jihad and
Fatah's al-Aqsa Brigades-- have already rejected that call. Arafat added
insult to Egyptian injury by calling with great pomp for a
ceasefire--during the two weeks of the coming Olympics in August!
Arafat, then, is already proving a reluctant partner for the Egyptians.

Turning to Sharon, some of his reservations concerning the Egyptian
demands are legitimate, and indeed point to excessive Egyptian ambition.
But other objections merely reflect Sharon's real design for the
Palestinian territories.

Egypt wants Sharon to agree that the process it is initiating will lead
to the introduction of an international force in Gaza. Sharon is not
interested. Indeed, many Israelis fear that the "internationalization"
of the process is Arafat's way of leveling the security playing field
and neutralizing Israel's capacity to defend itself against terrorism.

The international force envisaged by Egypt is supposed to supervise
security to enable the opening of Gaza's air and sea ports. Even the
Beilin-Abed Rabbo Geneva accord                       does not envisage
the opening of Palestinian ports and border crossings without at least
an interim Israeli security presence. True, Sharon's disengagement plan
does talk about reopening the ports and borders without an Israeli
presence at some point in the future. But I doubt he thought he would be
taken so seriously by the Egyptians.

Egypt wants all Israeli forces to leave Gaza, including the Philadelphi
road, and to pledge not to take action against acts of terrorism
emanating from the Strip. This is understandable in view of Cairo's
fears for the safety of its peacekeepers in Gaza. But it is virtually
impossible for Israel to totally concede its right to preempt or
retaliate against attacks from Gaza.

Egypt wants Israel to open the long awaited safe passage route from Gaza
to the West Bank, thereby ensuring that the Israeli withdrawal does not
completely cut Gaza off from the rest of Palestine. But this is
precisely what Sharon hopes to do: cut Gaza loose, thereby giving him
more freedom of maneuver to hold onto large parts of the West Bank.

Sharon is apparently prepared to contemplate a significant shift in the
Israeli-Egyptian security relationship if this helps him leave Gaza. But
he is hardly likely to comply with Egypt's conditions.

Cairo's plan appears to have become too ambitious. The Egyptians have
already begun hedging on their timetable, which was supposed to start in
mid-June. Perhaps some aspects of the plan, like international forces
and renewed peace talks linked to the roadmap, are mere window dressing,
intended to keep the Quartet happy. Let's hope so. The idea should be to
help get Israel and its settlements out of Gaza and enable it to stay
out, and to help the Palestinians get a grip on the internal security
situation--nothing less, but nothing more.

Like those before them who attempted over the past four years to end
this conflict, the Egyptians may soon become frustrated with both Arafat
and Sharon. They may then seek alternative ways to rebuff the threat of
radical Islam in Gaza and to deflect American pressures for reform--the
real reasons for their current intervention. Or they may continue to
cultivate unrealistically broad expectations. Either way we are liable
soon to confront the thesis presented disdainfully by Joseph Samaha in
al-Safir on June 24: "'Mubarak's plan' is the missing link between a
unilateral withdrawal that may never take place, and a roadmap that may
never be implemented."

