Three years after the Camp David summit--that infamous "lost
opportunity"--it is useful to examine whether the alternative approaches
attempted after the summit's failure were productive for either party to
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. It was inevitable that allowing this
very first and highly visible final status negotiations summit to crash
and burn would bring us to the only alternative to peaceful
negotiations--violent confrontations. Today, both parties are reaping
their rewards.

In the Palestinian perception, after Israel failed to convince the
Palestinian leadership to enter into final status agreements at Camp
David, it decided to try to use other means of "convincing" Palestinians
of the kind of solution that Israel thought correct. Starting with the
leadership of former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and since, Israel
has initiated the use of all manner of pressure against Palestinians,
including violence and collective punishment. There is no other
explanation for the government's precedent-setting act of allowing
right-wing opposition leader Ariel Sharon to enter the Haram Al Sharif,
an Islamic holy place, in a public relations stunt. When Palestinians
demonstrated, Israel responded with a blizzard of force, spending
thousands of bullets and killing an average of ten Palestinians a day
for the first ten days of what was later to be called the "intifada",
despite almost no Israeli casualties.

This barrage was accompanied by the rapid propagation of several myths
crafted by Israel about Camp David. One of these has been that Israel
made an "unprecedented and generous offer" to end the occupation on 90
to 95 percent of the occupied Palestinian territories, an offer that the
Palestinians refused to accept.

In fact, there was no documented Israeli offer made at Camp David. There
were American attempts to establish positions here and there, but these
were not Israeli, nor were they generous. Even these suggestions did not
present a serious strategy for handling the Jerusalem component of the
conflict, nor did they barely touch upon the very major issue of
refugees. After Camp David, there was the opportunity to build on what
the summit had started: United States President Bill Clinton introduced
his proposals                                                , which
were not refused by either Palestinians or Israelis. There is no truth
to the lie that Palestinians rejected the dream that they have always
struggled for.

The second part of that myth, of course, is that Palestinians did not
"accept" the end of occupation because they were intent on the return of
millions of Palestinian refugees, a demand that--as Israel and its
supporters tell it--is meant to reclaim that section of historic
Palestine that is now Israel. This is also pure fiction, since
Palestinians have never demanded the return of "millions of refugees,"
but always rightly said that the Palestinian refugee issue, which sits
at the heart of the conflict, must be solved on the basis of
international law and United Nations Resolution 194
                                           , and in a manner negotiated
by the two parties.

Israel has wielded these myths alongside an immense battery of force to
try to impose on Palestinians the kind of negotiating terms that are
convenient for Israel. What Israel has gotten instead are not weaker
Palestinian demands, but a further deepening of the vicious cycle of
violence and hatred and the spirit of revenge within both societies. It
has now come time for Israel and Palestinians to recognize that the use
of force is counterproductive and that replacing confrontation with
negotiations may have a better chance of achieving both sides?
legitimate objectives.

