Q: How do you understand Egypt's motives and objectives in
launching its Gaza initiative?

A: There are three reasons for the Egyptians' involvement in the
Gaza Strip. First is their understanding that they cannot claim to be a
leader of the Arab world without doing anything. If they want to be
engaged, they have to contribute more than their limited contribution
until now. Second, they understand that their position with the United
States is somehow connected to a positive image regarding the process.
And third, they understand that chaos in Gaza might somehow influence
the street in Cairo. I think the strongest element is the first and not
the third. At the end of the day the influence of Palestinian chaos is
minimal in Cairo.

Q: What will constitute the success of this project?

A: [The idea is to] give the Egyptians the chance to teach the
Palestinians how to organize themselves and help them be really
determined to fight terrorism--which is the main problem of the
Palestinians--and to do it without erosion of Israel's ability to fight
terrorism. There is no question that if the Egyptians can convince the
terrorist organizations to be more constructive after the unilateral
retreat and to begin to build their own society instead of promoting
terrorism, this is very positive from our point of view. If the
Egyptians can convince [Palestinian leader Yasser] Arafat to give up his
control over the security establishment and build a real force that will
deal with the terrorists, criminals and corruption inside Gaza--three
closely connected elements--this will be helpful for us. If they can
stop the smuggling of munitions from Egypt into Gaza, it would be very
important for reducing the level of terrorism coming from Gaza and would
benefit both Israel and the Palestinians.

Q: Are you optimistic that Egypt will succeed in these
endeavors?

A: The problem is that I'm not sure the Egyptians are ready to
pay the price, meaning to be involved in friction with Hamas and the
other terrorist organizations. And I'm not sure Arafat is ready to
implement what is being asked of him. At the end of the day we might
find ourselves in a worse situation, in which we commit ourselves not to
act against terrorism inside Gaza and at the same time nothing is done
by the Egyptians.

Q: How do you understand Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon's motives for inviting in the Egyptians?

A: Sharon understands that he's taking a huge risk for the
security of Israel by the unilateral retreat, and he wants to share
responsibility for the results with another Arab country. He would like
to believe that this time the Egyptians will act totally differently
from the way they acted up until now. We have to remember that they have
the sovereignty and control over the entrances to the tunnels used to
smuggle weapons into Gaza in recent years.

Q: So is Sharon adopting a radical new strategy toward Egypt?

A: I hope those Israelis who negotiate with the Egyptians don't
make a huge mistake by giving up one of the main achievements of the
political peace agreement with the Egyptians and allowing the Egyptians
to help the Palestinians with military forces. What the Palestinians
need is domestic security organization, not military forces.

Q: Let's assume Egypt succeeds in Gaza. How does this
affect the West Bank?

A: The West Bank is totally different strategically. I don't
think we can copy the Egyptian experience in Gaza into Judea and
Samaria. But after a few years of Egyptian peace in Gaza, we might learn
some lessons [regarding the West Bank].

Q: Back to Gaza: are you optimistic about the chances for
Egyptian success?

A: No, I'm skeptical about the Egyptians. In our experience with
them, they begin with high profile promises of a rosy future, and at the
end the implementation is very poor and the results are doubtful.

For example, for many years they promised to stop the smuggling of
weapons into the Gaza Strip but did not. Remember the Karine A
[Palestinian arms smuggling ship]? Its target was Alexandria. From my
personal experience, I can tell you that we tried to organize a visit by
our National Defense College to Egypt and couldn't succeed, nor could we
organize a reciprocal visit by them.

Q: To sum up, if Egypt does its part, are you in favor of
disengagement from Gaza?

A: At the end of the day, none of the real problems will be
solved by unilateral withdrawal, while the security risk Israel is
taking is so high that it is a mistake. But we live in a democracy: as
the decision is approved by the government and the Knesset, we should
minimize the risks and optimize the advantages that some people believe
might come out of it.

