Q: What is the objective of establishing a Jewish
neighborhood at Ras al-Amud, in the heart of Arab Jerusalem?

A: The central objective is to create Jewish contiguity between
different areas.

Q: But in fact isn't this an attempt to break Palestinian
contiguity, between the Temple Mount and the eastern outskirts of the city?

A: In advancing Jewish settlement in Jerusalem we are acting in
accordance with three guiding principles: linkage, which we mentioned a
moment ago; division, which you just asked about; and void, meaning
filling an area where there is nothing.

Q: Why do you think the introduction of permanent Jewish
residents to Ras al-Amud was accepted with relative tranquility?

A: This is a general question about Jerusalem--why has it been
relatively so quiet? I believe that because a large portion of the Arab
residents receives services from the municipality, they know what they
could lose. Everyone makes their own calculation. But I'm not
knowledgeable enough about this issue; I'm not certain this is the main
answer.

Q: What is your overall strategy concerning some 230,000
Jerusalem Arabs?

A: I would offer them full Israeli citizenship. I would not allow
them to take up citizenship of a Palestinian state, at least not at this
stage. As things stand, they should be our citizens, even though this
creates quite a few problems. We must endeavor to ensure that they
[Jerusalem Palestinians] do not become a magnet for the Arabs of Judea
and Samaria, because of the social services, and don't draw them into
Jerusalem, for example the Hebron Arabs who have moved to the outskirts
of Jerusalem.

Q: But most of the Jerusalem Arabs have refused Israeli
citizenship.

A: I'll leave the questions regarding their behavior to experts
like yourselves. I barely understand the behavior of the Jews.

Q: And how do you view the Jerusalem question within the
framework of a final status agreement with the Palestinians?

A: It's difficult to detach Jerusalem from the broader issue. We
should not alter the present borders of Jerusalem. We can discuss border
alterations that favor the Palestinians, but only at a moment of
strength in the negotiations, from a position of sovereignty. Today
every concession is understood as a prelude to the next concession.

Q: And the Temple Mount/Harem a-Sharif in final status?

A: The Temple Mount should be under Israeli rule. This is the most
holy site of the Jewish people. Sovereignty is determined by the very
fact that we are Jews. The Mount was taken from us by force, and I don't
reject retaking it by force, or perhaps through political negotiations.
The current situation is unbearable, when only Jews cannot ascend the
Mount.

The primary attention of the Israeli authorities should focus on the
Temple Mount. The task of Ras al-Amud is to guard the Temple Mount.

Q: How do you view the "mosaic" map of former president
Bill Clinton and former prime minister Ehud Barak, according to which
wherever Jews live in Jerusalem will fall under Israeli sovereignty, and
where Arabs live will be Palestinian?

A: This is not a plan. We said it then, when it was presented, and
today, sadly, we say "we told you so". There is no logic here. We have
seen where this leads us. We're still liable to get into this plan again
via the roadmap, which is a worse version of Oslo--through the back
door, by talking about freezing settlement activity and establishing a
provisional Palestinian state.

Q: Finally, can you address the security fence that is
going up around the city? The fence separates parts of the city in some
places. What are the ramifications for the future borders of Jerusalem?

A: This is the politicians' fence of folly. Behind closed doors
they all say there was no need to build it--they gave in to public
opinion. The army serves as the contractor and says "this is the
politicians' affair". The money could have been used for more serious
security objectives. This is one of the bigger scandals of recent times.
Of course it will have ramifications: it could partially determine the
border of Jerusalem, just like the border of the rest of Israel.

