There is an inclination on the part of most Palestinians, but also some
Americans, Europeans and Arabs and even a few Israelis, to assume that
when we return to final status negotiations, nothing will have changed.
The issues and positions on the agenda will be more or less those
discussed at Camp David II in July 2000, and then further refined in
ensuing bilateral meetings that culminated at Taba in January 2001. The
Clinton principles                                                 of
December 2000 are also frequently mentioned as points of departure for
future negotiations.

Of course, both Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and President Clinton
declared their proposals "null and void" once the negotiations ended.
But this tends to be discounted. Obviously the ideas put forth are no
longer either official or binding. But isn't it logical, once we stop
fighting and resume talking, to pick up where we left off?

Not if we factor into the picture the lessons that Israel must draw from
three intervening events: the circumstances of the collapse of the peace
talks at Camp David and afterwards, and particularly the "parting"
Palestinian positions on the refugee/right of return issue and the
Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif issue; nearly three years of bloody
conflict with the Palestinians; and the aftermath of the American
campaign in Iraq.

Thus even a left-leaning Israeli government (and not that of Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon) is likely to offer a wide range of revisions to
the Israeli negotiating position of Camp David-Taba. Some might make
negotiations easier; most are likely to make it even more difficult to
reach agreement, unless the Palestine Liberation Organization also
reassesses its needs and options three years later.

/Borders and settlements:/ Israel will likely show a greater readiness
to return to a defensible border that is close to the 1967 lines, and to
concede settlements, like, say, Ariel, that would be hard to defend
against Palestinian attackers because they could only be annexed to
Israel as the extremity of indefensible "fingers" of territory. Here
Israel would be applying lessons learned from the intifada, and the
parties will have an easier time agreeing on final status borders. (On
the other hand, a right wing Israeli government will insist on far
greater Israeli annexations of West Bank and even Gaza land than
demanded at Camp David. But this has little to do with lessons of the
past three years; the right held this view long before Camp David.)

/Border security with Jordan and Egypt:/ In view of its experience with
Palestinian arms smuggling before and during the intifada, Israel will
demand more stringent controls at the Palestinian borders with Jordan
(Jordan Valley) and Egypt (Rafah), in order to ensure that
demilitarization provisions concerning Palestine are enforced. This will
probably take the form of a more extended and more intrusive Israeli
security presence on the ground, even if it is integrated into an
international security force. A similar beefed up Israeli presence will
be demanded with regard to Palestine's air and sea borders.

/Palestine-Israel border security:/ While arrangements for trade,
tourism and worker mobility remain likely, Israel will place far more
emphasis on the concept of the border as "separation" rather than
"integration". This will likely include a security fence along the
agreed border.

/Early warning stations:/ In the aftermath of the defeat of Saddam
Hussein's regime in Iraq, Israel's early warning requirements looking
(electronically) to the east might be somewhat alleviated, thereby
possibly partially reducing the number of early warning stations it
needs to maintain on the mountain ridge of the West Bank, and limiting
the intrusion on Palestinian sovereignty.

/Refugee/right of return issue:/ Israel's position will be tougher. The
Palestinian leadership's insistence after Camp David that Israel accept
the principle of the right of return, coupled with the violence of the
intifada, the radicalization of the Israeli Arab community and
demographic realities, have persuaded most Israelis that the
Palestinians' ultimate aim is to "Palestinize" Israel. Hence any Israeli
government is now likely to insist that a peace treaty comprise
Palestinian recognition of Israel as a Jewish state, and not comprise
any Israeli recognition of the right of return.

/Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif:/ On this issue, too, Arafat's post-Camp
David insistence that there never was a Jewish temple on the mount is
widely understood as yet another attempt to delegitimize the Jewish
people and deny Israel's character as a Jewish state. Hence Israel will
probably insist that, whatever formula is found, it comprise Palestinian
recognition of the mount's Jewish history, with appropriate Jewish
access--of course, without violating the mount's Muslim history and status.

In short, Camp David/Taba cannot be replicated. But history, sadly, will
be repeated, in the sense that Palestinians will discover--as they did
after rejecting British partition offers in the 1930s, United Nations
General Assembly Resolution 181
                                            in 1947, and Camp David I
                                             in 1978--that overall they
are being offered less than what they turned down last time.

