Q: The Egyptian initiative was apparently needed because a
direct bilateral agreement on withdrawal between Israel and the
Palestinians was impossible. Why is that?

A: The Israelis are heading toward consolidating the occupation
in the West Bank through the separation fence, settlement expansion, and
all kinds of oppression against the Palestinians. We think that this
disengagement plan is using the withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, planned
for March 2005, to impose a kind of engagement in the West Bank through
the separation wall. A one-sided solution is being imposed on the
Palestinians.

Q: What do you think of the Egyptian initiative?

A: The Egyptians themselves say they don't have an initiative,
but they are trying to take advantage of the opportunity presented by
Israeli withdrawal from the Gaza Strip. They would like to help the
Palestinians to get control over the areas in the Gaza Strip from which
the Israelis are going to withdraw.

The Egyptians say they do not wish to market the disengagement plan. The
difference between the disengagement plan and withdrawal is that the
disengagement plan includes expansion in the West Bank, while the
Egyptians aim to help the Palestinians with the withdrawal from the Gaza
Strip. Nobody wants the Gaza Strip, perhaps not even the Palestinians,
so Israel is seeking to bargain Gaza for the West Bank.

The Palestinian leadership rejects this approach, even though everybody
in the world--especially the Israelis and Americans--says the
disengagement plan is the first step in implementing the roadmap. We
think that on the contrary, it is not a step toward implementing the
roadmap; it is an alternative step.

Q: Why do some Fatah members oppose the Egyptian initiative?

A: They have certain fears about the future Egyptian role in the
Gaza Strip. They think maybe the Egyptians want to play a security role
in the Gaza Strip. Also there are certain Arabs who oppose the Egyptian
initiative, like the Syrians. Last week, about ten Palestinian
organizations in Damascus issued a declaration against the Egyptian
initiative. Hamas and Islamic Jihad are opposed, because--I think--they
are concerned that the Egyptians are trying to consolidate the role of
the Palestinian National Authority, so this does not fit with their
interests.

Q: How likely is it that the PNA and non-PNA factions like
Hamas and Islamic Jihad will be able to agree on withdrawal terms?

A: They don't now. They have opposite positions. The PNA supports
the Egyptian plan.

Q: Do they all have to agree in order for the initiative to
succeed?

A: Hamas and Jihad could sabotage the plan, using different
means, like military attacks. On the other hand, there is an opportunity
to achieve agreement through the internal Palestinian dialogue. We think
that there should be concurrence, but now there is not.

