Q: After a great deal of hindsight, what did the experience
of Camp David teach Palestinians?

A: One can assess and reassess one's accomplishments and
failures, but obviously the Camp David experience failed for a variety
of reasons, including the contributions of the participants--Israelis,
Americans and the Palestinians.

The Americans convened the summit at a time when the negotiations had
not reached a level that would indicate conclusion. In a sense, they
convened the summit without significant preparation and under
duress--particularly from the Israelis, who knew that conditions had not
ripened enough. [Then-Israeli Prime Minister Ehud] Barak came with an
attitude of "take-it-or-leave it" and a strategy of ill will in the
sense that he did not offer complete and comprehensive support [for the
talks]. At the same time, he was attempting to undermine the interim
phase agreements by arriving at a permanent settlement that included no
further claims by the Palestinians, all the while knowing that the
Israeli position did not meet the minimum of what was required.

Third, the Palestinians went without sufficient preparation and a
coherent strategy. They went as a fragmented team, with many points of
view. They didn't present ideas and so they were in a reactive mode. A
lot can be said about Palestinian negotiating strategy.

Q: Do you think that there are final status issues where,
after Camp David and after the intifada, Palestinians would likely be
less flexible?

A: We cannot talk about being more or less flexible because Camp
David could not have reached an agreement. It was a starting point and
Barak wanted it to be a final point. I don't think that one can blame
the Palestinians--as many people like to do very conveniently--by saying
that this was a "missed opportunity", because there was no opportunity
to be missed.

The Palestinians made a very serious mistake in not exposing what
happened in Camp David, in not coming out publicly with their version.
The Israeli version and then the American version became the dominant
description of what happened. These were fraught with many vested
interests and personal agendas. Not until a year later, did the
Palestinian story start coming out.

Q: Why was that?

A: Again, probably a lack of understanding of the significance
of their own narrative, as well as the lack of a cohesive narrative. It
was a very obviously fragmented performance in the midst of a campaign
to discredit the Palestinians.

Q: When you look at the strain of negotiations through the
Madrid and Oslo talks, Camp David and then the roadmap, do you see any
significant shifts in the assumptions on which negotiations are based?

A: You cannot reinvent the substance. Palestinians have always
maintained that what is required is full Israeli withdrawal from the
1967 boundaries and the establishment of an independent and viable state
and an equitable and just solution for the refugees.

It doesn't take much imagination to address the basic issues. These are
the issues that have been on the books since the beginning and have been
addressed obliquely in a variety of ways.

But what has changed is the way that substance is being tackled. In
Madrid, even though there was a two-phase approach that the Americans
adopted (we tried very hard not to have a two-phase approach), there was
real political engagement.

In Oslo, of course, the talks were concluded because some issues were
totally ignored, others were postponed and there were separate
agreements--in a sense, the flaws of the Declaration of Principles
                                            (DOP) allowed it to be
signed. If it had been a serious document, then it would have taken much
more time and it wouldn't have been signed in the dark. It prioritized
the interests of the few at the expense of the public, and we are paying
the price because it allowed Israel to manipulate the DOP to its own end.

After that, Taba and Wye suffered from the basic flaws of the DOP:
Israel was in control. Palestinians were on the defensive and reactive.
There was further fragmentation of the land, further fragmentation of
the people, further phases that were not implemented. Then we ended up
at Camp David, where the basic flaw was that the talks came from the
mentality of occupation. The basis of any agreement should be
international law and legality and an understanding that there are equal
human rights, not Israel in a position of superiority.

The roadmap                                                 , for the
first time, supposedly includes a global commitment. There are no longer
two sponsors, the United States and Russia, but the Quartet [which
includes the United Nations and the European Union].

When the chips were down, however, we ended up with only one sponsor.
The roadmap had genuine third-party participation to provide
verification and accountability, but gradually the monitoring and
verification has become restricted to the Americans only.

The other unique thing about the roadmap is that it defines the
objective of talks as a two-state solution, with Palestine as a viable
sovereign state (even though [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon did
not agree to this formula).

Overall, the problems faced by the Palestinian negotiators, the Israeli
mentality of occupation, and the lack of third-party intervention have
been exhibited throughout the peace process. As such, Camp David
represents only one of those stages.

