The government of Israel decided several weeks ago that Palestinian
leader Yasir Arafat "is no longer relevant" from its standpoint. This
statement had largely declarative value: on the one hand it expressed
the Israeli public's deep disappointment with Arafat; on the other, it
served as an additional instrument of pressure to persuade Arafat to
recognize that he will not profit from the violence and terrorism that
he initiated in late September 2000.

During the years 1994-2000 the Israeli public pinned its hopes on a
peace process that would "end the conflict" and usher in security and
economic prosperity. While it was disappointed with the ongoing
Palestinian violence that accompanied the process, it generally accepted
Arafat's explanation that he was not responsible for the terrorist
attacks, and that he would do all in his power to prevent them. It
acknowledged the distinction Arafat presented to the world between "good
Palestinians"--supporters of the peace process led by the chairman
himself--and "bad Palestinians," the Islamic fundamentalist Hamas and
Palestinian Islamic Jihad. Throughout the Oslo process this division
enabled Arafat repeatedly to plead his innocence concerning terrorist
attacks. He demanded that Israel make concessions that would ostensibly
strengthen his standing among the Palestinian public vis-a-vis his
violent, refusalist opposition.

Following Arafat's rejection of Israel's far-reaching proposals at Camp
David in July 2000 (which included the establishment of a Palestinian
state on 97 percent of the territory and the division of Jerusalem into
two capital cities), even the most moderate Israelis understood that he
was not moving toward a political solution to the conflict. Their
disappointment grew yet further when it emerged that he had not only
elected to abandon the negotiating table, but that upon his return to
the Palestinian Authority he directed the terrorist organizations and
his own units to launch a wave of terrorism against Israel.

In fact, this directive constituted a direct continuation of Arafat's
policy since establishment of the PA. Arafat believes terrorism serves
his objectives. Accordingly, upon signing the Oslo accords he adopted a
strategy of maintaining a terrorist potential for the achievement of
political goals. At times, when he assessed that terrorism would
genuinely damage immediate Palestinian interests, Arafat invoked a
policy of "threats and persuasion" to prevent attacks against Israel. On
these occasions he informed the Islamic fundamentalist organizations
that the costs attached to such attacks outweighed the benefits; hence
he directed them to avoid such attacks for the time being. To ensure he
was understood, Arafat used the code phrase "damage to the Palestinian
national interest." When these efforts proved unsuccessful, he relied on
arrests and local violent clashes to enforce his message.

But even at its height, Arafat's counterterrorism campaign focused only
on restraining the terrorist organizations' motivation to attack Israel.
He never acted to eliminate their violent capabilities. He never
destroyed their explosives laboratories, never arrested, tried and
jailed terrorists for extended periods, never destroyed illegal weaponry
and never began educating his people to seek peace and to accept the
existence of Israel as a sovereign Jewish state. Instead, he elected to
ignore the terrorist organizations' military expansion and to violate
his contractual commitments to Israel to prevent terrorism. He continued
to incite his people against Israel through the PA media, school texts
and any other available means. From Israel's standpoint this meant that
even during periods of relative quiet, it was sitting on a powder keg.

Arafat's policy since 1994 testifies like a thousand witnesses that he
has opted for a strategy of non-acceptance of Israel's existence. One
expression of this strategy is his repeated declarations that, while
ostensibly he does not seek Israel's destruction, he can't be prevented
from dreaming about such a goal.

Thus it is perfectly legitimate for Israel to query Arafat's relevancy.
Not only did Arafat not fulfill his promise to provide peace and
security to Israel in return for its painful concessions--he himself has
emerged as the prime terrorist.

Today the Israeli public discussion centers on the question whether
Arafat is at all capable of stopping the terrorism.

A negative response to this question means that Arafat has indeed ceased
to be relevant from Israel's standpoint. Israel must wait until, sooner
or later, there emerges an alternative Palestinian leader or coalition
capable of leading the Palestinian people to a resolution of the
conflict by stopping the violence and destroying the military
infrastructure of the terrorist organizations.

A positive response to the question of Arafat's capacity to stop
terrorism leads to the conclusion that he has deliberately elected not
to exercise this capability. Here, anyone who still believes that
additional Israeli concessions, territorial or otherwise, made under the
pressure of terrorist attacks, will cause Arafat to adopt a policy of
peace and to strike at the terrorist infrastructure, is mistaken and
misleading. Further concessions will merely reinforce Arafat's belief
that violence pays.

The only way to try to force Arafat to make a strategic choice for
peace, is to apply ongoing pressure: Israeli, American, European and
Arab. Pressure that will force him to abandon his strategy of terrorism
and opt for non-violent means to resolve the conflict. The enlightened
world must raise the cost for Arafat of Palestinian terrorism to a point
where it no longer pays him to initiate and tolerate it.

In conclusion, Israel must bide its time until one of two developments
takes place: either Arafat's strategy changes, or the Palestinian
leadership changes.

