After 36 months of conflict and bloodshed, both Israelis and
Palestinians are worse off. We are further from a peaceful settlement,
our economies are suffering (the Palestinian far more than the Israeli),
and our leaders are increasingly ostracized internationally.

Moreover, our military and political leaders on both sides have erred
grievously in assessing that the use of brutal force could tip the
scales in this struggle. Instead, we have an increasingly dirty war,
initiated by Palestinian suicide bombings but pursued by Israel as well.

Only the extremists have gained. The Islamic radicals and the Jewish
settlers, both of whom oppose an agreed, fair and permanent two state
solution, have moved closer to achieving their perversely shared goal.
In the course of three years, Israelis and Palestinians have
progressively lost the capacity to communicate with one another, and
their leaders have lost all credibility in the opposing camp. The
settlements have spread, and the Palestinian birthrate has further
closed the population gap. Soon, very soon, geography and demography
will have defeated the last hope of a realistic repartitioning of Eretz
Yisrael/Palestine into two separate ethnic states, and Israel will be on
the slippery slope toward losing its Jewish and democratic character.

Paradoxically, in other ways Israel's overall strategic situation has
improved considerably over these three years, thanks to the events and
acts precipitated by 9/11. The American occupation of Iraq has reduced
to nil the danger to Israel of a new Arab military coalition (an
"eastern front") attacking it, thereby radically diminishing the threat
of conventional war. And the United States campaign against Islamic
radical terrorism and weapons of mass destruction in the hands of rogue
states has, for the first time, given Israel a major ally in countering
these threats.

Only the demographic/geographic strategic threat has grown. And while it
is entirely within Israel's unilateral capabilities to deal with it, the
body politic of the Jewish people appears to be paralyzed by fear: fear
of angry settlers and their rabbis, fear of hurting our vaunted
deterrent profile by displaying "weakness", fear of making unilateral
concessions--fear, indeed, of recognizing that the strategic benefits of
unilateral withdrawal by Israel far outweigh the tactical drawbacks.

Under these tragic circumstances, the only potential ray of light is the
fence. As an instrument originally designed to protect Israelis from
Palestinian suicide bombers, the fence is a quintessential byproduct of
three years of intifada. Yes, it is ugly and unpleasant, and hurtful to
innocent Palestinians in even its most benign permutation. But a fence
separating Israel from the West Bank, as close as possible to the green
line, could generate the separation both peoples need, and might begin
to delegitimize the settlements lying beyond.

The US administration, which won't pressure Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
over the settlements, the roadblocks and his other obligations under the
nearly defunct roadmap, has seemingly decided to get tough on the fence,
make sure it sticks close to the green line, and prevent Sharon from
hijacking it for political purposes. Perhaps because it perceives that
the domestic political costs in America of exercising this particular
type of pressure are minimal. If it keeps up the pressure, we may end up
with a fence that more or less approximates the borders that Ehud Barak
and Yasir Arafat nearly agreed on at Taba in 2001, during the early
months of the intifada.

If the fence begins to function as a border as well and contributes to a
positive separation, it would be the supreme irony of this intifada,
which broke out largely because Arafat could not or would not accept
Barak's terms. But then again, given that the two sides are incapable of
solving their differences through logic and rationality, they may just
have to settle for messy solutions that evolve over time in unintended
ways.

But the fence is being built slowly, and it can only reduce violence and
slowly create new facts--not solve the conflict. Nor, beyond applying
pressure on the fence, does the Bush administration appear to have any
realistic strategy for ending the conflict between Israelis and
Palestinians. Neither do Ariel Sharon and Yasir Arafat. Thus, bearing in
mind the American election timetable, we are probably in for another 18
months at least of conflict and suffering.

