Track II talks achieved unprecedented success through the Oslo
breakthrough, which raised their status in the arena of negotiations and
diplomacy. This breakthrough paved the way for the phenomenal burgeoning
of unofficial track II dialogues, each one with high hopes that the new
track would be the next to become an official negotiating track,
bringing with it success and fame.

But to achieve this, each second track must consider a group of factors:

1) The Palestinian leadership must offer cursory review of the track
proposal and its goals, in order to get official support, encouragement,
blessing or--in the worst case scenario--simple acknowledgement. The
closer the leadership stands in relationship to the hierarchical head,
the better the track's possibilities.
2) The leadership should also propose names to represent it or
knowledgeable parties to follow the activities of the track in question.
The higher their rank or the more they enjoy the favor of the president
or the leadership, the better the chances in the eyes of the donor
parties or Israeli side.
3) The leadership should be presented with detailed reports after the
end of each round that amplify the achievements, however minor, and
highlight the participants on the Israeli side.
4) The caliber of the Israeli participants is still the main indicator
of a second track's importance to the leadership.

The Palestinian leadership itself has held varying positions on this
sort of unofficial activity, depending on the political period. Even
within the leadership, there have been varying positions towards track
II activities. There were many who have persistently opposed them for
fear of the status of the original official negotiations, and for fear
that any track might branch out like an octopus to devour the official
track or dwarf it.

Some of these fears are justified, especially due to the absence of a
body for coordinating track II activities, either inside a framework to
benefit official talks or inside the group of second tracks. Track II
work patterns and mechanisms are generally not subject to any laws or
methodology, which adds to the dangers: poor coordination, the
possibility that basic conditions for holding such meetings do not exist
or that participants do not have the necessary knowledge or expertise.

Despite the obvious dangers, the leadership is never truly threatened
since these groupings do not exceed the pursuit of social activities
that aspire to develop into something more with the consent of the
leadership. Therefore, the leadership has veto power, which allows it to
be more hands-off in dealing with this negotiating activity, offering
respite from interventions over details or the imposition of strictness
over various initiatives.

It is clear to all that some of these tracks have been a nuisance for
the leadership because of the subjects they have proposed or because of
the positions that were signed or agreed upon by some track II
participants at the expense of the official first track. The result was
to put indirect pressure on the leadership's positions on the same
subjects. The lack of vision in some tracks has embarrassed the
leadership, especially those where participants were affiliated with the
leadership. Even so, there has never been a final position from the
Authority banning such tracks or impeding their work. At times, the
Authority has distanced itself from the second tracks as much as
possible. Still, it has never completely broken ties, perhaps because
the interests of its officials involved in second tracks sometimes
exceed those of the Authority. Right now, official interest is
heightened and is encouraging these tracks because no official contacts
exist.

Returning to the Oslo breakthrough, this was the first time that a
second track succeeded in having its status elevated to that of official
talks. The reason for the success was the absence of an official
negotiations track at the time. One might say that as long as there is
an official negotiating track, track II talks have no chance of
breakthrough. Instead, they are attempts to provide constructive
suggestions for loosening up negotiating restraints on the first track.
So far, however, this has proven a failure. Official negotiators
purposely refuse to even look into track II ideas and proposals so as
not to give credence to their importance and so as not to recognize the
principle of a supposed integral relationship between the first and
second tracks.

There is no doubt that a second track is a treasure trove from which
official negotiators might benefit if it is organized and its work
mechanisms coordinated with the leadership, without domination. As such,
it is important that there is no breakthrough of the second track unless
the first founders or is suspended.

The present state of negotiations is showing the heightened importance
of the second track and even the emergence of tracks somewhere between
official and unofficial. This type of hybrid track represents the peak
of danger for participants in the first track because they are poised to
become the alternative if the first track remains stalled. Therefore,
the survival instinct in the activists of the first track forces new
ways of negotiating and any means possible of semi-official
communication to remain at the top of the negotiating pyramid. At this
stage, we see this in abundance.

There are many track II negotiations. Some are one-off deals, and others
are sustained. Some follow natural relationships between the Israeli and
Palestinian sides, in the form of people-to-people and joint cooperation
projects. Some pursue the issue of negotiating in different forms, and
then translate that into different levels. Some reflect professionalism,
seriousness and negotiating creativity. With all these species, one must
give each a fair evaluation. Competition is not the issue here, even
though it consumes the thoughts of those involved in official talks. One
must remember that serving the homeland does not require permission from
anyone.

