Assassinations, or as they are termed in Israel, "targeted killings,"
are nothing new to the Israeli intelligence community. But over the
years, at least until the 1970s, they were considered a last resort, a
means to be employed rarely and wisely.

There were a few reasons for this caution. First, many in the
intelligence community thought over the years that espionage was not
mafia-style Murder, Inc. More important, the policy of targeted killings
is a double-edged sword. What you do to your opponents, they can do to you.

The first time Israeli intelligence carried out an assassination was on
July 11, 1956. Colonel Mustafa Hafez, Egyptian commander of military
intelligence in the Gaza Strip and the man responsible for sending the
fedayeen infiltrators to Israel, was killed when a book he received
exploded.

The use of mail bombs became a central tool in the 1960s, especially in
harrassing and assassinating German (former Nazi) scientists who were
involved in developing advanced weapons for Egypt.

After the Six-Day War, the fight against Palestinian terror, both in the
territories and beyond the borders of Israel, moved assassinations up
the ladder of Israeli intelligence priorities. But the watershed was the
murder of 11 Israeli athletes in Munich in 1972 by "Black September," a
Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) front. Then Prime Minister Golda
Meir ordered Mossad head Zvi Zamir to embark upon a campaign of targeted
killings of anyone directly or indirectly connected with the athletes'
murder.

It was the first time in the history of Israeli intelligence that it had
been directed to initiate a "project"--not a one-time killing but a
systematic elimination of dozens of people.

A pattern was set in motion at that time that became the basis for
similar operations to this day. Intelligence compiled a list of targets;
today it is known as a "bank". A special, limited forum known as the "X
Committee" had the authority to approve Mossad requests to eliminate a
person on the list. The X Committee would consult the attorney general,
who served as a one-man court, sentencing the suspect to death.

This was also the first time that the motive for the assassination was
revenge. Although it was couched in lofty terms like "deterrence" and
"future prevention" of terror, it was clear that the urge to avenge the
deaths of the Israeli athletes was the main reason for the decision.

The systematic assassination campaign suffered a near fatal blow in July
1973 in Lillehammer, Norway, when Mossad gunmen, out to eliminate Ali
Hassan Salameh, who was believed to be the brains of Black September,
mistakenly shot and killed a Moroccan waiter, Ahmed Boushiki.

The failure in Norway brought several questions into sharp relief: Are
targeted killings worthwhile? If so, who should the targets be? Although
clear answers have never been formulated, a kind of tacit understanding
was reached whereby targeted killings are permissible, in certain
circumstances, but the use of this weapon must be cautious, wise and rare.

It was advisable that only senior operational commanders should be
targeted, those whose deaths would result in a serious impairment of the
organizations' operational capabilities. Responsibility should not be
taken publicly so that Israel would not appear to be using terror
itself, and so that its relations with other countries were not damaged,
as they were with Norway and with Jordan after the attempt to
assassinate Hammas leader Khaled Mashaal in 1997.

The intelligence community also assumes that it is possible, even
desirable, to hit leaders of small organizations, those that are no more
than a "one-man show." Fathi Shikaki, leader of the Islamic Jihad, was
killed in October 1995 on the assumption that killing him would put an
end to the capabilities of his small organization. His presumed
successor, Abdullah Ramadan Shalah, was considered ineffectual and
lacking in leadership capabilities.

Those assumptions were proved wrong. Shalah proved to be a capable
leader, and Islamic Jihad in Gaza has produced some of the worst suicide
bombings of recent years.

The most important element that is always taken into consideration in
discussions between the intelligence chiefs and the political echelon is
the cost-benefit ratio. If the assassination leads to a severe response
on the part of the terror organizations, then it was a losing proposition.

This consideration was apparently either forgotten when it came to the
targeted killing of the director-general of Hezbollah, Abbas Moussawi,
in southern Lebanon in 1992, or those who made the decision operated on
the basis of mistaken assumptions. Hezbollah's response was stinging:
two car bombs in Buenos Aires, against the buildings housing the Israel
Embassy and the Jewish community organization, in which more than 100
people were killed and many were injured.

With hindsight, there is no doubt that many in the intelligence
community believe that the 1988 decision to hit Khalil al-Wazir, Yasser
Arafat's deputy, also known as Abu Jihad, was a mistake. Looking back,
it is clear to many that his death left Arafat alone at the leadership
level of the PLO, without the counsel of a talented and pragmatic
strategist.

Always, even at the height of assassination wars, there was a kind of
silent agreement on both sides not to hit "national" leaders. Here and
there, exceptions cropped up, like the failed attempt of the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine to kill then former Prime Minister
David Ben-Gurion during a visit to Scandinavia in the 1960s, or plans
devised already in the late 1960s and again in Lebanon in 1982 to kill
Arafat.

Already in 1998, after the failed attempt against Meshal, the
subcommittee for intelligence and security services of the Knesset which
investigated the case published an unprecedented critical statement in
which it said,"for many years the governments of Israel have not
formulated policies in the war against terror organizations that are
based on fundamental thought processes and continuity...".

But over the last three years, and especially with the unwise decision
to kill Sheikh Ahmad Yassin, all the basic assumptions and past lessons
have been forgotten or abandoned. From a weapon of last resort,
assassination has become the most available of weapons; from wise and
cautious use, it is now widespread and wholesale.

This change has damaged another, mainly psychological, assumption: the
mystery that surrounded previous assassinations cast fear into the
hearts of the enemy by their very rarity and sophistication. That
mystery dissipates the moment the act becomes routine. This, more than
anything else, shows the long road the Israel Defense Forces and the
intelligence and security forces have traveled, from daring and
creativity to paralyzed thinking.

