"Intifada" is a misleading name for this period of confrontations
between Israelis and Palestinians that began on September 29, 2000, a
few weeks after the collapse of the Camp David negotiations and one day
after the unprecedented visit of right-wing extremist opposition leader
Ariel Sharon to Jerusalem's holiest Muslim shrine. The term "intifada"
is misleading because it gives the impression that Palestinians
initiated these confrontations. As well, the name "intifada" originally
referred to the 1987 uprising of the Palestinian people against the
occupation, a series of popular and non-violent acts of resistance that
ranged from strikes to demonstrations, while this "intifada" has
conversely marked the bloodiest period of confrontation in the history
of the century-long Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

Remembering the first days of the intifada is useful in understanding
its nature, and how it has changed. The day after Sharon's visit to the
Al Aqsa Mosque in occupied East Jerusalem happened to be a Friday, the
day that Palestinian Muslims gather for prayers and, on this occasion, a
day that was used to protest Sharon's tour. The demonstrations were met
by a massive Israeli crackdown, one that left seven dead bodies in and
around the mosque area. Of course, the Palestinians killed were not
armed, and not even Israel has accused them of using weapons against
Israeli police.

That tragic day was followed by demonstrations and protests all over the
West Bank and Gaza, most of which were unarmed public expressions of
outrage. The Israeli military responded in a manner that resulted in an
average of ten Palestinian dead a day, most of them civilians. And
still, casualties on the Israeli side were few.

Indeed, the main characteristic of the first few weeks of what became
known as the intifada was the continuous and unnecessary Israeli killing
of Palestinian civilians. World leaders, including American officials
and the United Nations secretary general, referred to Israel's handling
of the situation as disproportionate. Tragic incidents, such as the
killing of child Muhammad Dura in the lap of his father, became icons
for the Palestinian people and their supporters. The killing of 13
Palestinian citizens of Israel in the Galilee, all civilians whom even
Israel has not accused of wielding arms, was another decisive moment.
These incidents heightened regional public and official support for
Palestinians (and conversely, animosity towards Israelis) and almost
reversed in entirety the inroads that Israel had made as an accepted
player within the Arab world and beyond as a result of the peace process.

Simultaneously, the United States, which did little to stop the Israeli
killing, was also the target of Arab criticism. As a result, the US lost
credibility that it had garnered in the region via its leadership of the
peace process. Attempts were made to stop the descent into violence,
including steps taken by President Bill Clinton himself, but to little
avail. While these efforts proposed a way out, they offered little
tangible reason to believe that the way out would actually take hold.

In the middle of the first year of the confrontations, a great deal of
radicalization became apparent in the Israeli and Palestinian publics.
Palestinians increasingly demanded an armed response to the continuous
Israeli killing and it was during this period that the unfortunate
phenomenon of suicide bombings began to take hold. Some of these attacks
were against civilians and others were against military targets, but all
kinds of armed attacks were carried out by Islamist groups and then even
by the secular Palestinian political mainstream.

This radicalization was mirrored in the Israeli public, which elected
one of the most right-wing governments in Israel's history and
marginalized Israel's peace camp, the Labor and Meretz parties. Sharon's
"coup" gave this man, who had always stood adamantly opposed to the
peace process, the opportunity to gleefully undo nearly every outcome of
the peace process, developments that Sharon had failed to prevent as
leader of the opposition. The two major peace process developments that
displeased his right-wing coalition were the establishment of the
Palestinian Authority, seen as an expression of Palestinian political
sovereignty, and the granting of limited Palestinian control over some
areas of the occupied territories. Gradually, not less than 90 percent
of the land that had been previously freed from occupation was brought
back under Israeli control, and the Palestinian Authority was left
holding the bag for administrative responsibilities. The result was a
functional division between Israel, which controlled security, and the
Palestinian Authority, which did its best to continue administration of
the areas that had been under its control during peace times. That
outcome fit snugly with the Israeli right-wing's historical argument
that the proper solution for the Palestinian problem is one where Israel
controls the land, while the Palestinians control the people, rather
than the prospect of territorial division that had been the goal of the
peace process.

These events took their economic toll. In three years of confrontation,
Israel managed to reduce by half the struggling Palestinian economy.
Israel's collective punishment measures, most of which have no security
justification, and which prevent the movement of people and goods from
town to town, were responsible for an unemployment rate that skyrocketed
from 37 to 50 percent. The number of Palestinians living below the
poverty line rose in turn to 60 percent.

Still, Israel has failed to achieve its strategic objective of forcing
the Palestinian people and leadership to change their negotiating
positions. In the long view of things, the use of an unusual level of
force has certainly not helped Israel to achieve its legitimate
objectives of peace and security. At the same time, the continued use of
violence by Palestinians, especially against Israeli civilians, has been
responsible for a new isolation of the Palestinian cause and its
leadership and growing criticism in some US circles that associate the
Palestinian struggle with terrorism, the major American policy issue
after the events of September 11.

The only conclusion to be reached in an objective analysis is that the
use of force or violence has not helped Israelis to achieve their
legitimate objectives of peace and security, nor has it enabled
Palestinians to achieve their legitimate objectives of ending the
occupation and achieving freedom, statehood and self-determination. That
leaves us both with no other option save peaceful negotiations based on
international legality, which calls for a complete end to the Israeli
occupation in return for terminating the conflict, a just solution for
the Palestinian refugee problem based on international law and to be
agreed on by both sides, and finally, the attainment of a peaceful
settlement that allows everyone on this land to enjoy peace, security
and economic prosperity.

