Ten years ago, in 1992, I was involved in a track II, or unofficial,
academic-style initiative between Israelis and Palestinians--one of many
I have participated in over the past 15 years or so. Under the
sponsorship of a prestigious American academic institution, we began by
discussing security issues and ended up helping formulate the "Gaza and
Jericho first" idea that found its way into the Oslo talks, which took
place more or less simultaneously. On the Israeli side we were three
apolitical "security veterans" operating at our own volition and
reporting voluntarily on our impressions to the establishment, including
Prime Minister Rabin and Foreign Minister Peres, who for their part
barely reacted. The Palestinian side was linked far more closely to
Yasir Arafat.

I have often asked myself, since that time, why the parallel, Oslo-based
track II initiative succeeded in producing a breakthrough in
Israeli-Palestinian relations, whereas our project remains, at best, a
footnote in history. The simple answer is that the Oslo participants had
the audacity to draft an actual agreement, a declaration of principles
for Israeli-Palestinian peace, whereas we saw our role as one of talking
and distributing single page reports to ministers. A more complex aspect
of the answer is that at Oslo, the Israeli participants were directly
linked to Deputy Foreign Minister Yossi Beilin, and through him to the
foreign minister and prime minister who, even if they were not original
sponsors of the talks, were sympathetic to its product. They were all
also linked to the Norwegian government sponsors of the talks through
veteran membership in the Socialist International.

In other words, from an early stage in their evolution, the Oslo talks
were never completely unofficial. In several aspects they resembled a
"back channel"--which is official, but secret--rather than an unofficial
"track II."

This distinction is relevant with regard to recent reports of unofficial
Israeli-Palestinian initiatives to draft new sets of peace principles.
It explains why their influence will be limited.

On the Palestinian side, Sari Nusseibeh, Arafat's representative for
Jerusalem, and Ziad Abu Zayyad, formerly minister for Jerusalem, are
reportedly involved in separate initiatives. On the Israeli side reports
indicate that Ami Ayalon, former head of the Shabbak (General Security
Service), is one of the key participants. And Yossi Beilin has long
acknowledged that he is engaged in extended talks with Palestinians like
Minister of Information Yasir Abd Rabo over a detailed peace plan.

First, the good news regarding these contacts. They appear to reflect a
readiness on the part of Palestinian participants to reconsider two of
the hard line positions that Arafat adopted at Camp David and
thereafter--regarding the Temple Mount and the refugees' right of
return--and reformulate them in ways more acceptable to Israelis and
less suspect of undermining Israel's very nature as a Jewish state. This
effort is truly commendable, insofar as it contrasts with a near
complete absence of a serious reassessment of official positions on the
part of most Palestinians, in light of the catastrophic developments of
the past two years. While the "product," as leaked to the press, appears
to offer few new ideas that were not already presented by United States
President Bill Clinton in December 2000 or discussed at Taba in January
2001, it can nevertheless be greeted under the rubric "better late than
never."

We can safely assume that today, as in the past, the Palestinians
formulating these new positions have cleared their ideas with Arafat,
Abu Maazen, and others; there has always been a strong reticence, not to
say fear, on the Palestinian side of track II talks to air new ideas
without Arafat's blessings. But herein lies a drawback. Unlike the
situation in the first half of the '90s, Israelis are now deeply
skeptical about ideas and positions associated even informally with
Arafat or with others in the veteran Palestinian leadership. Israelis
witnessed, for example, how elements in the Beilin-Abu Maazen draft
peace treaty of late 1995 were first denied by Abu Maazen, then
ultimately rejected by Arafat. So low is Arafat's credibility today that
in some ways it would be more encouraging if we knew that Nusseibeh and
Abu Zayyad were true pioneers of Palestinian civil courage, presenting
bold new ideas that had been rejected by the official leadership. In
other words, on the Palestinian side the official link is now a burden,
not a blessing.

At the Israeli end the most that can be said about these informal
efforts is that they are designed to produce a product that stimulates
public discussion and, perhaps (as Ami Ayalon is allegedly planning)
serves as a platform for a campaign against Prime Minister Sharon in the
upcoming elections. From the Israeli standpoint, none of these efforts
could even remotely be considered a back channel. The Israeli
interlocutors are presumably not in any way coordinating their views
with Sharon, who is known to reject virtually all the premises of final
status that they are discussing.

Thus, while track II participants now have no hesitation about drafting
entire "virtual" peace treaties, the papers they produce are of limited
efficacy.

