Incitement against Israel and the Jews frequently appears in Arab school
textbooks and usually contains the following components:

* Denial of Jewish nationhood and of any valid connection between the
Jews and the land of Palestine. The State of Israel is thus presented as
an illegitimate usurper entity that should be erased from the map. Its
Jewish citizens are illegitimate inhabitants of the country and should
leave or be expelled.
* Israel and the Jews are presented as the source of tremendous
disasters that hit the Arabs, especially the Palestinians, as well as a
looming danger over the entire Arab world. Detailed and lively
descriptions of past and present atrocities attributed to both Israel
and the Jews make them easily demonized.
* To keep this demonized image intact, no information is given to the
school student about ordinary Jews or Israelis, their daily life,
culture, literature, society, history, religion, etc. On the contrary,
the vast majority of references to the Jews and Israelis are negative,
aimed at intensifying the hatred of both.
* The inevitable conclusion is that such evil should be fought and
uprooted by every possible means. The land of Palestine would thus be
liberated and the Palestinian refugees would return to their former
homes from which they were expelled by the usurpers. If this can be
partly achieved through negotiations and peace agreements, all the
better. But the final goal should never be forsaken. Vivid descriptions
of the ongoing struggle against the occupation of Palestine are to be
found in literature textbooks throughout the Arab world, accompanied by
emphasis on the traditional Islamic ideals of jihad and martyrdom, both
in the military context.

All the aforementioned points are present in the Arab curricula I have
studied. The differences between them are restricted to their various
degrees of openness and intensity. Syrian textbooks are the harshest
ones, as they contain virulent expressions against the Jews and Israel
and call for their annihilation. The Saudi books come next, followed by
the Egyptian ones, which still contain ugly anti-Semitic expressions and
a few cases in which war against Israel is advocated.

The new Palestinian books that since 2000 have been gradually introduced
into the PA school system (today they are used in eight grades out of
twelve, with two more grades intended to receive them next year), do not
contain such open calls. As such they differ from other Arab textbooks,
as well as from the Jordanian and Egyptian textbooks that the
Palestinian Authority itself reintroduced into the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip in 1994, and after discarding the copies of those same books
that had been cleansed of anti-Semitic expressions by the Israeli
administration there after 1967.

Yet, by presenting Israel not as a sovereign and legitimate state, but
rather as a usurper entity that occupied Palestine in 1948 (which
entails the absence of Israel's name from all maps and reference to its
pre-1967 territory by circumlocutions such as "the lands of 1948"); by
not counting its 5.5 million Jewish citizens (unlike its one million
Arab citizens) among the inhabitants of the land; by demonizing Israel
and the Jews (by using phrases such as "Tartar battalions",
"slaughterers", "human wild beasts", or by inserting a passage in a
literature textbook for grade 8 which reads: "Your enemies killed your
children, split open your women's bellies, held your revered elderly men
by the beard and led them to the death pits"); by reasserting the
validity of the violent struggle against Israeli occupation while
blurring the exact geographic borders of such occupation; by encouraging
jihad and martyrdom (a poem taught in grade 7 reads: "The flow of blood
gladdens my soul, as well as a body thrown upon the ground, skirmished
over by the desert predators")--by all these means, the new textbooks
published by the Palestinian Authority prove to contain the same
components of incitement that are present in other Arab textbooks.

Israeli textbooks, on the other hand, look much different. Though they
may sometimes contain antagonistic phrases against Arabs (especially in
non-governmental ultra-religious schools), by and large they are free
from the afore-mentioned phenomena. One can find in them recognition of
the Palestinians' national movement and active advocacy for peace with
them, as well as objective information about Arab history and Islam,
samples of Arabic modern literature, and even rejection of prejudiced
views against Palestinians or Arabs. Above all, the textbooks present to
the Jewish school student the Arab individual as an ordinary human being
and promote friendly relations between people of both nations,
especially children.

