The first conclusion that the Israeli political and security
establishment should learn and internalize after 18 months of
Palestinian Intifada, concerns the intensity of Palestinian blind
terrorism and guerilla warfare against the State of Israel and the
entire Israeli presence between the Jordan and the Mediterranean. These
have reached dimensions that are both painful and impressive from the
standpoint of the use of force. This is relevant not only for the Jewish
public in Eretz-Israel and the world, but for most international actors,
large and small, whatever their direct stake in the outcome.

Thus the upgrading of Palestinian warfare over the past year and a half
arouses concern. It obliged the Israeli government in April 2002 to
initiate a large-scale military offensive against Palestinian terrorist
concentrations in all the Arab cities of the West Bank (except Jericho,
Hebron and East Jerusalem) and surrounding Arab villages. This
counterattack clearly reflected the Israel Defense Forces' force
superiority in direct encounters with Palestinian terrorist bases. On
the other hand, international pressures exercised by the United States,
Europe and the United Nations forced Israel to withdraw the better part
of its forces from most of the territories they occupied--a withdrawal
that revealed, and apparently will continue to reveal, unnecessary acts
of Israeli cruelty.

In the absence of a fair political solution for the realization of the
Palestinian people's legitimate right to self
determination--independence alongside Israel, not instead of
Israel--brutal Palestinian terrorism will continue. In the not too
distant future it will provoke new temporary IDF conquests, which in
turn will generate intensified international pressures on Israel,
followed by a renewed and temporary IDF withdrawal, and so on and on in
a routine of bloodshed, until the only possible and fair political
solution is realized: the establishment of an independent Palestinian
state alongside Israel, in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, whose
government operates in East Jerusalem. Such a solution will inevitably
require the removal of a number of Israeli settlements from the West
Bank and Gaza Strip. It is apparent that without energetic pressure and
intervention by the world's powers, led by the US, Israelis and
Palestinians will not succeed on their own in compromising on a
permanent peace agreement.

Meanwhile it behooves us to focus on two negative phenomena that are
increasingly taking root in the Israeli reality. First, Israeli security
circles are becoming captivated by the ritual of fences. This approach
is based on a vain trust that failed as far back as 1938, when the
British built the "northern fence" along the border with Lebanon. It
makes sense to put up political fences to separate nations and states,
but only after they have reached clear political understandings, and if
possible peace agreements. A strategic fence without a political
agreement is a pointless waste. Unfortunately, for some people in Israel
the notion of a fence is replacing political peace arrangements.

Secondly, there is slowly developing a dangerous dynamic among Israel's
Arab citizens. The more extreme the Palestinian struggle against Israel
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, the stronger the negative suffusion of
Palestinian hatred for Israel into the hearts of Israeli Arabs. This is
an unnecessary additional injection of venom into Israel's future. It
must not be ignored, lest this important Arab public, which has been
slowly coming to terms with its fate of living together with us in a
modern democratic country, now ally itself with our enemies.

In conclusion, note the interesting statement by General Peterson, from
a visiting delegation of pro-Israel retired American generals (Yediot
Aharonot, April 26, 2002, Saturday Supplement, p. 11): "Al Qaida exists
and will continue to exist as long as there is a situation where people
live without hope. This is the infrastructure where al-Qaida soldiers
will be found." In my assessment, this perceptive analysis by an
American general is doubly applicable to the Palestinian
people.

