Most analysts, when trying to evaluate the current confrontations, base
their analysis on the mistaken assumption that Palestinians initiated
the Intifada. As such, they ask: what have the Palestinians achieved and
what have they lost? While that is certainly a legitimate question, it
is important to correct the assumption on which this analysis is based.
These confrontations began on September 29, 2000, after Israeli Prime
Minister Ehud Barak gave permission to the right-wing extremist then
leading the opposition to make an unprecedented and provocative visit to
the second holiest Islamic mosque in the world.

It is not as if Israeli officials were not warned the consequences of
that act. Palestinian President Yasser Arafat and four other important
Palestinian leaders made a secret visit to Barak's house, in which the
Palestinian leader warned Barak of the clear consequences of that visit.
A few days later, Jibril Rajoub, head of the Palestinian West Bank
Preventative Security, was quoted on the front page of the Jerusalem
Post, saying that if Ariel Sharon was allowed to visit Al Haram Al
Sharif, a wave of angry and fierce popular demonstrations would result
that neither Israeli nor Palestinian security would be able to quell. He
told the Israelis that they should not expect Palestinian security to
prevent the angry demonstrations because it considered its security
warning a sufficient contribution towards preventing the imminent outburst.

The second Israeli step that pushed the region towards violence was
correctly characterized by the introductory analysis of the United
States-led Mitchell Committee. That investigatory group found that
Israel's brutal overreaction to Palestinian protests immediately after
Sharon's visit to the mosque was largely responsible for the outbreak of
the confrontations. It might be useful to look back at the figures and
statistics of the casualties that showed, for example, that in the first
ten days of those angry but largely unarmed demonstrations, the Israeli
army killed an average of ten Palestinian demonstrators a day, with
almost no casualties on the other side.

It can subsequently be argued that the transformation of the
relationship between the two sides from one of peace negotiations to one
of violence and confrontation was made essentially on Israeli
initiative. As the result of the failed final status negotiations at
Camp David, the ongoing violence can be seen as the Israeli way of
"punishing" the Palestinian leadership and people for their negotiating
positions at Camp David. They must also be understood in light of
Barak's deteriorating public position, with elections just around the
corner. Many Israelis thought that the Barak government's popularity
could be improved by dealing roughly with Palestinian demonstrators.

Hence, the rationale behind the Israeli campaign of violence against
Palestinians was aimed at influencing a change in the Palestinian
political and negotiating position. In the Palestinian perception, the
ability to resist this pressure and to maintain political positions that
remain identical with those stipulated by international legitimacy, laid
out in Security Council Resolution 242, which calls for ending the
occupation, is among the most important Palestinian achievements of this
period of confrontation or Intifada. The Palestinians have proven false
the Israeli analysis (which some Palestinians also subscribed to) that
after the Oslo agreements the Palestinians had no other option besides
negotiations, whether Israel adhered to those agreements or not.
Palestinians have shown that while it was their preference to continue
with peaceful negotiations towards ending the occupation, once that
track was exhausted and violence imposed, Palestinians had other options.

In any case, after the takeover of Sharon, the nature of the fight was
changed. Sharon's elections brought Palestinians to the conclusion that
Israel was indeed not ready to end its occupation of Palestinian land.
Since then, we have been stuck with an Israeli government that holds an
ideology based on negating the other rather than compromising with the
other. This government believes in Israel's historic and religious
rights in the Palestinian territories, the very territory that
international law considers occupied land and that the Oslo agreements
proposed be gradually transferred to the Palestinian Authority. It is
this ideology and impasse that has made the resumption of any meaningful
peace process impossible, and consequently meant that we are now stuck
in the confrontational mode.

