United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 (1967) has long been
considered a building block for peace in the Middle East. Its importance
derives from the fact that it was adopted unanimously by the council,
and was accepted by the parties to the conflict. The resolution as such
is of a recommendatory character.

The council laid down a few principles to be applied in future
negotiations: an Israeli withdrawal from territories occupied in 1967
(according to the French text, "retrait des forces armees israeliennes
des territoires occupes"), the establishment of secure and recognized
boundaries, mutual recognition, freedom of navigation in international
waterways in the area, a just settlement of the refugee problem, and the
adoption of measures to guarantee the new boundaries.

Unfortunately the parties differ on the interpretation of UNSCR 242 on
several points. Two of these differences are discussed below: the
question of the scope of the withdrawal, and the refugee issue.

The Arab states and the Palestinians claim that the resolution calls for
a complete withdrawal of Israel to the 1967 borders. They base their
claim on a line in the preamble that emphasized "the inadmissibility of
the acquisition of territory by war", and on the above quoted French
version of the withdrawal clause in paragraph 1.

Israel is of the opinion that a withdrawal is required to secure and
recognized boundaries to be established by agreement, and not to the
1967 lines. Israel's claim is based on the following:

First, the English version of the withdrawal clause: if there is a
discrepancy with the French version, the English one should be preferred
since the proposal was drafted in English and most of the deliberations
in the council took place in English.

Second, a proposal to add the word "the" (withdrawal from "the"
territories. . . ) was not adopted by the council.

Third, the call for withdrawal has to be interpreted in conjunction with
the call for the establishment of "secure and recognized boundaries".
This latter provision would have been meaningless if there had been a
call for full withdrawal to the 1967 lines.

And fourth, the provision on the inadmissibility of the acquisition of
territory by war reiterates the principle of international law that
occupation by itself does not justify annexation.

Turning to the problem of the refugees, while UNSCR 242 merely speaks of
a "just settlement" without determining what this solution should be,
and without limiting its scope to Palestinian refugees, the Arabs claim
that by implication the provision refers to earlier General Assembly
resolutions that recommended that the Palestinian refugees be permitted
to return to Israel. There is, however, no basis for this interpretation
in the text of the resolution.

To conclude, despite considerable disagreement on its interpretation,
UNSCR 242 is mentioned in many agreements between Israel and her
neighbors as the basis for any peaceful settlement. Let us hope that it
may also help us in the future to reach peaceful settlements with the
Palestinians as well as Syria and Lebanon.

