Initially, the Intifada acquired a non-violent popularity that continued
for some time. But the Israeli government drowned the Intifada in blood
when its army, lead by the extremist General Shaul Mofaz, killed no less
than 200 Palestinian civilians and injured around 2,000. Among them were
13 Palestinian citizens of Israel who were shot by police bullets that
also wounded hundreds of others. All of this took place before a single
Israeli was killed in the confrontations. Israel defined the rules of
the game in a way that guaranteed it become an arena of escalating,
violent confrontation. This was the easier and more advantageous
approach for Israel, since it is the stronger side.

Every battle has a goal. The Palestinian people have made clear that
their permanent goal is to end the occupation. The Israeli side, for its
part, has emphasized that its goal is to guarantee Israeli security.
Examining these two goals, it is difficult to discuss successes after
two years of continued bloody confrontation. Palestinians see blood and
destruction everywhere, and I believe that Israelis have a persistent
feeling of lost security. But although the material and human losses
have varied, the losses on the Palestinian front have been far greater
than on the Israeli side. The number of civilians killed by the Israeli
army is many times greater than the number of civilians killed by the
Palestinian resistance.

The Palestinian people cannot claim that they have made steps towards
freedom and independence, and the Israeli government cannot claim that
it has created security for its citizens or succeeded in actualizing an
economic revival. On the contrary, the glaring results confirm a fact
that has been overlooked during the last two years: that the complex,
many faceted conflict cannot be settled by crude military force or
violence alone. This is a fact that the extreme right government in
Israel has not been convinced of, despite that it has used up all means
of oppression against the Palestinian people. And so the confrontation
will continue.

It could be said that both sides are in a crisis. Both hanging from a
high tree, each has lost the ability to offer the other a ladder to
climb down on. The Israeli government did not try to invest in the more
than forty days without suicide operations to create a less bloody
atmosphere serving as an exit point for both sides. Instead, the Israeli
government continued its crimes and siege. Israel has only succeeded in
creating a wounded, frustrated and hungry neighbor. And to some degree
or another, we have participated in creating a tense and nervous Israeli
neighbor that is uncertain of its future, thus making the situation
extremely complicated.

Neither negotiations nor confrontation have brought freedom to
Palestinians or security to Israelis. Thus both camps are going to
collectively resort to radical ideological forces, and the confrontation
will take an ideological form in the future that will not stand for or
work with middle of the road solutions. Should this happen, I believe
that we may disappoint a generation that believes in a historical
solution on the basis of two states for two people. And here the losses
of Israelis seem greater to me.

But while Palestinian losses have been so great as to be uncountable,
Palestinians will also "lose" the corruption fostered by Israel, which
thought that it could create a leadership that would peacefully coexist
with Israel but not end the occupation. Among the few things that might
be described as Palestinian successes is the failure of this plan for a
corrupt Palestinian leadership. Indeed, its failure may lead to the
appearance of a leadership that is more credible and committed to the
cause of the Palestinian people.

The Intifada has also enabled the Palestinian people to reclaim their
right to resist the occupation, a right that had been taken away by the
Oslo Accords, which at the same time did not guarantee a halt to
settlement construction. Because of this, it is difficult to talk about
the achievements of the last two years.

Among the things that Israel lost was its image as a state that claims
to be democratic. Under confrontation, its image has quickly regressed
to that of a racist, right wing militarized state. This can be seen in
the dominant presence of military leaders in Israeli politics. It also
lost an opportunity that had begun to take hold in recent years--the
opportunity to become a normalized state in the region. The bloody
scenes seen daily by tens of millions of Arabs have returned the old
image of Israel to their minds and returned the struggle to its original
form.

