Q: Since the forming of the new Israeli government has
settlement expansion decreased, stopped or is it on the rise?

A: Israel has been focusing recently on housing units in
Jerusalem and around Jerusalem, in what we call "metropolitan
Jerusalem." Near the green line around Jerusalem, there is new
infrastructure being built for new housing units, but in the Jordan
Valley or in the middle of the West Bank, the majority of the
construction is near the main roads, or what Israel desires for its
final status borders.

When you look at Modiin bloc [near Jerusalem], there is a new
neighborhood and new housing unit under construction. Givat Zeev has a
new neighborhood under construction that will create 654 housing units.
According to the Israeli vision, Givat Zeev will eventually fall inside
metropolitan Jerusalem. This is why Israel established the "separation
line" and increased the settlement in this area. Near Modiin or what we
call Latroun, Israel wants to annex this area and so it is expanding its
settlement in this place.

The total number of settlers in the West Bank in 2002 was 205,000
settlers. In 2003, that population has grown to 218,000. In the Modiin
bloc alone, the number of settlers has increased from 15,000 to
17,000--2,000 more. In Givat Zeev, the settlers in 2002 numbered 11,000;
today they are 12,500.

Q: How does the Israeli government usually confiscate
Palestinian land for settlements?

A: Most of the land settlements are being built on was
confiscated many years ago. In Givat Zeev, the land was confiscated in
1979 and in Modiin, it was confiscated in 1990.

More recently, land has been confiscated to build bypass roads [that
connect settlements], especially in the Hebron area and northwest of
Jenin, in what we call the Rihani bloc. There, the Palestinians were
told last year that this is "state land." To confiscate land, Israel
uses either a military order or a demand that it is needed for public
purposes, or it says that this is "state land." Although we often take
these cases to court, the Palestinians almost always lose.

Q: Why can't the Palestinians prove that they own the land?

A: They often have no documents saying that they own the land,
because under Jordanian law or in the British Mandate period, they were
given no documents stating that the land is registered. The Israeli
court demands these documents, but the Palestinians can't produce them.

Q: How does the "separation wall" fit into Israel's
settlement plan?

A: In its first phase, the wall that is now under construction
started from T'anak and extended to Qalqilya. The new area that it
creates between the new "separation line" and the old green line
contains around 11 villages. Most of the land was not confiscated but
placed defacto under Israeli control. The land of some 21 villages falls
behind the line. This land is not declared "state land," but falls under
Israeli control.

After seeing the Taba and Camp David maps, I believe that this land will
eventually be annexed to Israel. More or less, these are the same maps
[as those being used to build the wall today]. According to the Taba and
Camp David maps, Ariel and Kedumim will also fall on the Israeli side,
cutting a wedge 20 kilometers into the West Bank.

The walls that will be built in the Jordan valley are from a map drawn
in 1983 when Ariel Sharon was minister of defense. He created a map with
two lines showing that the Jordan Valley would be under Israeli control
and the west of the West Bank would be under Israeli control, and five
more lines from west to east would be under Israeli control, thus
dividing the West Bank into five pieces.

Q: Do you think that Palestinians have made any mistakes as
they have tried to deal with the settlement issue?

A: We made all the mistakes possible. In Taba, our mistake was
not looking at the map that was drawn at that time, according to
Military Order #50. We Palestinians went to the Supreme Court and froze
that order, but then at the Taba talks, Israel again used this map. So,
as you can see, the West Bank now looks like a mosaic that is based on
this map.

Q: What do you think that Palestinians can do now to combat
settlement expansion?

A: We have drafted many scenarios for the settlements and
perhaps they will fall under Palestinian sovereignty if we arrive at a
real peace. Whether that is realistic or not, according to United
Nations resolutions from 1967 until today, all of these settlements are
illegal and it is our right to discuss their future.

Q: Do you think that the Israeli public really understands
what is happening with settlements today?

A: If you go to Tel Aviv and you ask them where Ariel is, they
don't have any idea.

