Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's new disengagement plan, as
presented on May 30 to the Cabinet, represents not one but several new
dynamics. These relate to the public and political acceptability of the
plan itself, as well as to Israeli-United States and Israeli-Egyptian
relations and the vicissitudes of Israeli politics.

The Israeli political angle, and specifically the objections to the plan
expressed by the negative majority in the Likud referendum on May 2 and
by Likud ministers, have generated specific changes in the plan which
should render it more acceptable.

By carrying out the redeployment in four phases, Sharon has now
introduced a monitoring mechanism that can stop the withdrawal if things
go wrong. In introducing a significant Egyptian role in facilitating
post-withdrawal Gaza Strip security and possibly mediating between the
Israeli and Palestinian security establishments, Sharon has removed the
term "unilateral" from his plan and reduced the likelihood that the
withdrawal will generate a total breakdown in security or a Hamas
takeover. The decision to demolish the dwellings left behind in the Gaza
settlements, while problematic, responds to a powerful objection of the
settlers at the emotional level-that their former homes would be
occupied by the very terrorists who have been attacking them. It also
internalizes the realization, communicated by Palestinian and
international sources, that the settlements as constituted are virtually
useless in terms of Palestinian housing needs, and that the attempt to
credit Israel with their net worth in anticipation of eventual refugee
compensation negotiations is a virtual non-starter from the Palestinian
as well as the international standpoint. And it denies the settlers,
once removed from Gaza, a focal point for their own anticipated
irredentist appeals.

We should have no illusions about where Sharon is going with this
revised plan-if the matter is left up to him. By referring only to the
June 24, 2002 vision of United States President George W. Bush
                   , arguing without foundation that the roadmap
                        obligates the Palestinians to fulfill their
security undertakings unilaterally before negotiations can resume, and
presenting a long list of regions in the West Bank that "will remain
part of the State of Israel", Sharon is announcing that the
disengagement plan is a "one off" project that is intended to leave
Israel in control of half the West Bank and to rebuff additional
territorial pressures for a long time to come. The plan asserts that its
"completion. . . will negate any claims on Israel regarding its
responsibility for the Palestinian population of the Gaza Strip", even
though as currently constituted it leaves Israel on the Philadelphi road
and leaves the Gaza Strip without any ports of entry not controlled by
Israel. In other words, Israel remains very much responsible.

The original rationale for Sharon's disengagement initiative-to "head
off" domestic and international pressures for larger territorial
concessions that seek to fill the diplomatic "vacuum"-never held water
in the first place. Despite Sharon's intentions, no matter what Israel
does short of near total withdrawal, and regardless of whether it enters
into negotiations with the Palestine Liberation Organization or
continues to go it alone because it has no viable partner, the pressures
to continue to roll back the settlement enterprise-on the part of the
Israeli public, post-election Washington and the international
community-will continue to mount.

But if Sharon fails now to achieve government endorsement for the
project and if-in an increasingly threatening worst-case
scenario-Washington's Iraqi fiasco flies out of control and Israel is
blamed or scapegoated at least in part for the messy US involvement
there, then Bush administration anger with Sharon could grow. This is
one more reason for Sharon's current stubborn insistence on his plan.

In this regard Egypt's projected involvement could take on strategic
proportions. It introduces the possibility that Sharon's relatively
modest disengagement plan will, for the first time since 1967, restore
an Egyptian presence, however small and temporary (and conceivably a
Jordanian presence, though the Hashemite Kingdom resolutely rejects this
option at present), in the Palestinian territories. The invitation to
Egypt reflects both Israeli and Palestinian strategic failure to control
the territories. It has potential far-reaching consequences for Israel's
relations with Egypt as well as for the sovereign nature of an eventual
Palestinian state.

Finally, the political dynamic launched by Sharon on May 30 could soon
affect the composition, indeed the very existence, of his government.
The possible scenarios and variables are too complex to lay out in
brief. Like all of his predecessors of the past decade, Sharon as prime
minister has apparently grasped that the Palestinian issue demands
painful compromises that are acceptable in the abstract to the public
but unacceptable in concrete form to the country's elected political
institutions. True, his vision of territorial compromise is still
painfully inadequate, his suspicions of Arab intentions in general
negate the possibility of fruitful negotiations, and he appears
incapable of offering the public and the world a convincing rationale
for undoing the settlements that he labored so hard over three decades
to build. Yet he is apparently prepared to risk his political future on
the idea of abandoning territory destined for a Palestinian state.

For this reason alone he deserves support, lest this essentially
unilateral initiative suffer the political fate of the bilateral
initiatives of Rabin, Peres and Barak that preceded it.- Published
31/5/2004   bitterlemons.org

