Among Palestinians the hot topic of the day is what exactly is the
nature of the understandings that appear to have been reached between
President Mahmoud Abbas and the factions. There have been many educated
guesses--some say a truce or ceasefire was agreed upon while others say
what happened was simply a "calming" and not a truce in the true sense.

The wording is very important, and goes some way to explain the attitude
of the factions. Abu Mazen knew that the factions would not respond to a
demand for a full truce if they did not get guarantees in return that
Israel would halt all its military operations against the Palestinians,
especially the assassinations, incursions and house demolitions. Israel
has responded to the current calm unenthusiastically, and is simply
issuing official statements. Abu Mazen has received no formal guarantees
of anything yet.

It is in this context that the statements of Hamas and other factions
must be understood. The factions have already declared that what is
happening is only a calming of the situation, with Hamas saying that,
"it would not accept a truce except in the context of the higher
interests of the people and an integral policy congruent with the
challenges of the coming phase". The movement said it considered this an
inappropriate time for any talk about a truce or ceasefire since the
Israeli army is continuing its crimes against the Palestinian people in
the Gaza Strip.

Statement after statement from the factions come back to the same point.
What matters is what happens on the ground, and for as long as people
are killed--recently a three-year-old girl, Rahma Abu Shamas, on January
26--the factions will take this as a signal that Israel is not prepared
to encourage the calm.

According to PA sources, Abu Mazen has received "definite promises" that
the Israeli government will halt assassinations and incursions, and has
informed the factions of this. The sources said Abu Mazen did not
release his statement about the truce until he had confirmed the Israeli
position and after the meeting between Israeli defense minister Shaul
Mofaz and former public security minister Mohammed Dahlan, which
resulted in an understanding to transfer security authority in five West
Bank cities to the PA and to further deploy Palestinian security forces
in the northern and southern Gaza Strip. An Israeli official had
previously announced that the army would halt "targeted liquidations" of
Palestinian activists if Palestinian police enforce calm and security.

But the factions are liable to want formal guarantees of a cessation of
Israeli violence, as well as clear signals of intent, including a
release of prisoners. One Hamas leader, Mahmoud Zahhar, was recently
quoted as saying that "We will not grant calm except in exchange for a
national price, the first of which is the release of all prisoners. We
will not allow the calm to continue if any prisoner of any political
color remains in jail."

The factions also remain skeptical regarding what any ceasefire is
likely to bring on the political track. One anonymous Hamas source
recently told me that it "is not right for Hamas to offer Abu Mazen a
truce [simply] for him to return to the same erroneous political track
that was taken by Arafat". On this track, he added, Hamas "must have a
role".

Thus the factions are likely to remain extremely cautious for the time
being. None of them trust Israeli statements, and most remember that the
hudna of 2003 was ended by Israeli actions. While a temporary calm has
been called, the ball is firmly in Israel's court if it is to turn into
something more lasting and solid.

