The Palestinian refugee problem has always been a thorny and sensitive
issue. While pundits and politicians alike have formulated and
reformulated different scenarios and solutions, one single and unified
stance has yet to be taken. However, I believe that there are certain
points that must be made within the context of the refugee problem,
especially in light of the recent controversy over some of my recent
statements on this issue.

First, the idea of the establishment of a Palestinian state along the
1967 borders is one that is or should be understood to mean that it is
primarily within the borders of this state that the problem of
resettling the refugees will be addressed. This understanding is in no
way inconsistent with United Nations Resolution 194, although of course
that resolution does not necessarily imply such an understanding. It
also accounts for the distinction often heard by Palestinian leaders
between the need to have Israel recognize "the right of return," and the
negotiated agreement between the two sides over the actual
implementation of this right. Ever since the establishment of the State
of Israel (but right up to the negotiations at Camp David), Israel's
position has been that it is in theory prepared to accept a partial
repatriation, with the bulk of the rest of the problem addressed through
material and political compensation. A resolution of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict on the basis of a two-state solution,
involving as it does a national ceding of part of the Palestinian
homeland to Israel, clearly presumes that the Israeli part of the
homeland will be Israeli, and not Palestinian.

My second point is to say that acceptance of this compromise, and a full
realization of its political implication by the Palestinian people
and/or the leadership at this point is clearly painful. Therefore, the
demand for a Palestinian state, while upholding one basic principle
concerning self-determination and freedom, clearly involves a painful
compromise concerning the wholesale return of Palestinians and their
descendants to their original homes.

Speaking in terms of history, Palestinians could have adopted one of two
possible strategies: one based on individual rights, and the other on
collective or national rights. A strategy based on the first approach
might have been formulated in terms of the struggle for the rights of
return and equality (I have long ago espoused such a strategy only to
find almost total opposition to it in the mid-eighties). A strategy
predicated on the basis of the second approach can be--and eventually
was--formulated in terms of the struggle for the rights of
self-determination and statehood. My contention is that these are two
incompatible strategies, at least in terms of the practicable
international framework. In terms of personal preferences, I would
support the adoption of the first strategy, but I realize it has far
less support, both among Israelis and Palestinians. Furthermore, it is
my contention that, given a balance between collective and individual
rights, giving weight to one clearly and logically supposes a
minimization of the weight accorded to the other. Thus giving a
preference to a national right clearly diminishes from the weight
accorded to an individual right.

I have heard it argued that these two strategies are compatible, not
contradictory. If the aim is to dissolve Israel as a state, then this is
indeed true. But if so, we cannot expect Israel to be a peace-partner in
any negotiations aiming to achieve that end. Therefore, to espouse those
two strategies simultaneously is to opt out of the peace process in
which we have been engaged for the past decade. This may be the option
of some, but it is by no means clear that this is the option of the
majority of the Palestinian people.

Another point that needs to be made as an elaboration in this context is
that while the right of return to individuals is indeed sacrosanct, so
is the national right to freedom from occupation and independence. If
upholding the right of independence detracts from the right of return,
upholding the latter equally detracts from the former. We therefore have
a case of two sacrosanct rights from which we are compelled to choose by
our political circumstance.

Finally, I am on record from the initiation of the Madrid conference as
being in favor of a general referendum on any peace agreement reached
with Israel. If it is possible to reach an agreement concerning our
national right of independence, then this agreement, fully elaborated as
to explain the future implications on individuals, whether refugees or
not, should be presented for a public vote. Options should also be
presented clearly and realistically.

My observations on this issue are clearly analytical, rather than
legalistic or moral. They have to be so given the nature of the conflict
our people are engaged in, for it is neither a conflict in court, nor
before a moral judge.

