So far this war in Iraq, unlike its predecessor of 1991, is not keeping
us awake at night. This time around, we don't have to deal with Scud
missile attacks, wearing gas masks in sealed rooms. But that doesn't
stop me from waking up every so often at 3 a.m. in a cold sweat.

No, I don't wake up because of Saddam Hussein and the threat posed by
rogue states with missiles and weapons of mass destruction. The American
war on Iraq, however problematic for much of the world, is for most of
us in Israel a welcome attempt by a friend and ally to deal with a
strategic danger that we have been struggling to cope with on our own
for decades.

Nor do I worry about a mega-attack by an Islamic radical movement. The
United States has determined that these same mortal enemies of Israel
threaten vital American interests, and that too is good news for Israelis.

An onslaught by a coalition of hostile Arab armies? That last happened
in 1973, and it's at the bottom of everyone's threat perception list.

Rather, I wake up in a cold sweat in the middle of the night because the
government of Israel, with tacit American backing, is continuing to
build and expand settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The
settlements endanger not Israel's immediate physical security but its
very essence as a Jewish and democratic state.

Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's first government, from 2001 to 2003,
presided over the emergence of some 70 new "outposts" on hilltops in the
West Bank; in fact these are by any standard nascent settlements. That
government included a Labor Party component that ostensibly constrained
settlement expansion.

Now, in Sharon's new government the housing ministry is in the hands of
one far-right pro-settler party, the NRP, and the transportation
ministry (which paves bypass roads so that 200,000 settlers can avoid
contact with the three million Palestinians among whom they live) is in
the hands of another, the National Union. We shall shortly witness even
more energetic and unrestrained settlement construction, as Sharon and
his allies deploy the settlements so as to create an unbreakable
geographic interlock between Israelis and Palestinians. They seek to
"win" the geographic battle to control the Land of Israel/Palestine
between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea.

Yet in the meantime we are losing the demographic battle. Jews are
already a minority in the totality of these same lands--the State of
Israel, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip. Sharon aspires to maintain the
Palestinian territories under long-term Israeli control precisely
through the spread and proliferation of the settlements. He believes he
can compel a Palestinian majority to live in a "state" that finds
expression in a handful of disconnected enclaves that take up about 50
percent of the West Bank and are surrounded by settlements.

This plan is a non-starter. It is patently unacceptable to the world,
and especially to Palestinians, who increasingly reply: "fine; if you
Israelis no longer want a two-state solution, then we'll demand 'one
man, one vote,' and eventually we'll rule everything."

Saddest of all for my sleepless nights, US President George W. Bush--who
ostensibly advocates a two-state solution quite energetically through
the "roadmap" concept--is encouraging Sharon and the settlers. The same
President Bush who seeks to dispense with our rogue state aggressors and
our radical Islamic terrorist enemies, is the first American president
not to demand outright that Israel freeze settlement expansion
forthwith. Instead he repeats, not once but twice in recent weeks (on
February 26 and March 14) that only "as progress is made toward peace,
settlement activity in the occupied territories must end."

As if restraining the senseless spread of settlements is merely a reward
for Palestinian good behavior. As if progress toward peace can be made
while the settlers celebrate their hilltop victories in the West Bank.
As if Bush doesn't understand that Sharon and the settlers must be
denied support because the Israel that so many Americans admire and
support is in danger of losing its very soul.

As if the American Jewish community, whose votes Bush seeks, does not
itself support a compromise two state solution and reject the settlers'
path. As if the image of Israel as a Jewish, democratic state is not the
single key aspiration that unites nearly all Israelis, Jews and friends
of Israel.

As if Bush and his advisers never read "The March of Folly."

