Q: What is your analysis of the American administration's
reception to Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's "disengagement" plan?

A: There has been a pattern to American responses to
initiatives taken by Sharon over the last three years of the intifada,
whether military or political. First, there is surprise and then there
are negotiations. We are seeing the same with this initiative--first,
there was displeasure and surprise and now there is a team in the United
States negotiating the details.

It is entirely possible that they might agree to something. The American
reservations are generally well known, for instance [that Israel] not
transfer any settlers from the Gaza Strip to the West Bank, and also
that there be "adjustments" to the wall. But it remains to be seen what
they finally agree to.

Q: What does this do to the roadmap                        ?

A: The roadmap, practically speaking, has been dead since the
minute the present Israeli government posed its 14 reservations, of
which the US administration accepted 12. But there are explicit
references in the Sharon plan that make the death of the roadmap more
official. One of the aspects [of Sharon's plan] is to convince the
Americans that there be no negotiations with Palestinians unless there
is a change of leadership. This is not a part of the roadmap.

Q: Why do you think that the US administration would be
willing to alter the vision presented by US President George Bush in
that manner?

A: That depends how seriously one takes President Bush's
vision. It has no details and no timetable. Sharon claims that his plan
need not conflict with President Bush's vision, provided--as he
says--that the partner on the other side fulfills certain conditions. In
a way, the Bush administration was kind of pushed into it by the Arab
and some European countries; the vision itself is rather wishy-washy,
especially since there is no power behind it.

Q: Do you think that Sharon is serious?

A: I note that it has been argued over the last two or three
years that [Sharon] has no political plan. This is a bit odd because
only one month after he was elected he conducted an interview with
/Haaretz/ newspaper in which he specified clearly what he was thinking,
which is exactly what he is now trying to execute: a Palestinian state
on 42 percent of the West Bank and a long-term agreement with final
negotiations at an indefinite date.

That is exactly what he is trying to execute at the present time, with
or without a Palestinian partner.

Q: What is your prognosis for the conflict?

A: In my opinion, it is very bleak. These moves will mean
continued conflict in various shapes or forms, but it is obvious that
without Israeli withdrawal from the territories occupied in 1967, there
will not be peace between Israelis and Arabs. The present formula of
Sharon's plan ensures continued conflict, especially if carried out
unilaterally. It will mean almost total separation between the West Bank
and Gaza. The wall that is being erected will become the focus of
different types of conflict or struggle. The situation will continue
like this until there is pressure on the Israeli government to be
serious about peace in the area.

Q: Given that, what are the Palestinian Authority's options?

A: There are various options, but the problem that the
Palestinian Authority faces is that they are not taking any initiative.
They are leaving the initiative in the hands of the present Israeli
government. Part of the reason for that is that what preoccupies the
current Palestinian leadership is their political survival.

For instance, some ideas have been under public discussion for the last
two or three months. One option would be to state to all interested
parties that the Palestinian Authority will dissolve itself barring
specific steps are made to advance the peace process--and then to go
ahead with that if need be, leaving Israel to bear the full burden of
occupation that it is not bearing now.

This is one option--it need not be the only option. But the main problem
is that there is political paralysis in the Palestinian Authority and a
lack of initiative. At the present time, the only option is to react to
what Sharon does, which is a position of weakness. 

