Since 1967 every American president has made a key speech in which he
presented the administration's views regarding the basic components of a
solution to the Israel-Arab conflict. Not one of these speeches has
stuck in our memory. Comprehensive American solutions like the Rogers
Plan (1969), the Reagan Plan (1982) and even the fresher Clinton Plan
(2000) never constituted a basis for negotiations; they have remained as
little more than code names for the American approach.

Will the Bush Plan of 2002 suffer the same fate? The answer depends on
two key factors: the components of the plan, and the determination of
the president and his administration to carry it out.

The programmatic part of Bush's speech reflects an internal logic that
is problematic mainly from the Palestinian standpoint. While the
two-state vision is presented in Bush's opening lines, the road to a
Palestinian state is paved with a series of tasks that would be complex
and challenging for any nation, but especially for Palestinian society
in its current state. From the US standpoint, realization of the vision
is conditioned upon fulfillment of a number of objectives:

* a new and different Palestinian leadership;
* genuine reform rather than cosmetic change;
* the reforms are intended to produce new and democratic political and
economic institutions, a market economy and anti-terrorism measures. The
new institutions include a strong and authoritative legislature, a
constitution that establishes separation of powers, and a government
capable of exercising effective rule;
* economic reform predicated on transparency and good management;
* reforms in the judiciary and in the security services;
* and of course, again, a war against terrorism.

When the Palestinians achieve these objectives, the US will support the
establishment of a provisional Palestinian state. Since no explanation
is offered for this provisional status, we may assume that the president
believes that following negotiations with Israel over the final borders
of a Palestinian state, its capital and other aspects of sovereignty
(did the president refer here to control over air space, for example, or
to demilitarization?), it will be awarded a permanent status. Throughout
the entire Oslo process, deadlines repeatedly turned into bad jokes,
with neither party adhering to a single one. President Bush avoided
setting timetables for achieving his objectives, with the sole--and
strange--exception of local elections, which are supposed to take place
by the end of this year.

Even the list of Israeli tasks opens with a Palestinian task, a
condition: "as we make progress toward security" and "as violence
subsides,"

* Israel will withdraw completely to the pre-September 28, 2000 lines;
* settlement activity must cease;
* the Palestinian economy will be able to develop, along with
normalization, and revenues collected for the PA and frozen by Israel
will be delivered to honest and accountable hands.

These steps will be followed by discussion of the issues of Jerusalem,
Palestinian refugees and borders. Here President Bush emphasizes US
support for an Israeli withdrawal to "secure and recognized borders."

Finally, the president asserts that with an intensive effort these goals
can be attained in three years.

From the standpoint of the key regional players, Bush's speech
constitutes a classic instance of the glass that is both half-full and
half-empty. America's unique status internationally, the influence of
the events of September 11, and the US's determined stance on
terrorism--all oblige the regional players to respond positively to the
half-full glass and to mutter their criticisms of the half-empty glass
through gritted teeth.

From the standpoint of the Palestinians and the Arab world the call to
remove the current leadership, i.e., Yasir Arafat, is extremely
demanding if not impossible. As for Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, even
without the Bush speech he did not intend to negotiate with Arafat, and
the speech relieves him with near finality of the possibility that such
negotiations will be imposed upon him.

Nor are the other reforms simple to achieve, particularly if the US
indeed insists that they be more than cosmetic.

Particularly problematic from the Arab-Palestinian standpoint is the
lack of synchronization, not only between the Palestinian and Israeli
tracks, but particularly between the reduction of terrorism and
enhancement of security, on the one hand, and the steps that Israel is
asked to take, such as ceasing settlement activity, on the other. The
synchronization that was implicit in the Mitchell Plan of April 2001 has
been replaced by what looks like a sequential process that begins with a
cessation of terrorism.

In this sense the president's speech sounded at times like a piano
concert in which it is not always clear how the music played by the left
hand is related to that of the right hand. The speech's internal logic
and the call for Palestinians to replace Arafat enable PM Sharon to
praise the speech. Yet at the same time, in the president's vision a
Palestinian state will emerge, its borders will be determined in
accordance with United Nations Security Council Resolution 242, and
questions like Jerusalem and the refugees will be on the president's
agenda, even if Clinton's approach to them was not adopted. These are
the elements that will help the Palestinians digest Bush's speech.

Whether this speech survives as a plan of action will be determined by a
number of factors: possible erosion in the will of both sides to
maintain a situation that involves not only ongoing loss of life but
deep economic damage; an absence of alternatives; and a disconnect in
bilateral communication. The addition of certain elements in the near
term could improve the speech's survivability. These include convening a
regional conference, accelerating processes dependent on international
aid such as reform of economic institutions and enhancement of the
economic situation, release of revenues by Israel, and relaxation of
Israeli closures that could permit a phased but rapid return to as much
normalcy as possible.

Finally, all the regional actors should bear in mind that there are
still more than two years remaining in President Bush's first term,
without taking into account the possibility of a second term. None of
the actors on the international scene has any good reason to enter into
confrontation with him and the US.-Published 1/7/02 

