The Bush administration's approach toward the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict has gone through a number of permutations. Upon taking office
in 2001, the new American president indicated that he did not intend to
get deeply involved in peacemaking between Arabs and Israelis. His
predecessor, Bill Clinton, had failed at this seemingly hopeless task,
and in so doing wasted valuable American diplomatic energies and
prestige. Bush received the Mitchell Report
                                                , sent Secretary of
State Powell and special envoy Anthony Zinni several times to the
region, but avoided any serious American initiative. Under pressure from
the Arab world and the international community, the administration
agreed to participate in the efforts of the Quartet (the United States,
the United Nations, the European Union and Russia) to generate a new
peace plan, but with little enthusiasm.

This chronology was punctuated at an early stage by the events of
September 11, 2001. US post-9/11 policies, by emphasizing a preemptive,
aggressive, zero-tolerance attitude toward terrorism emanating from the
Middle East, tended quite naturally to favor Israel's position against
that of the Palestinian leadership. Ultimately this developed into the
demand that the Palestinians remove Yasser Arafat from effective power
and elect an alternative leadership as a precondition for American
involvement. But at the same time, Bush became the first American
president to officially endorse a two-state solution, and his June 24,
2002                                              speech, which became a
bedrock of his policy, appears to endorse the 1967 lines as the basis
for such an outcome.

All the while, Bush could not ignore the role of two important electoral
constituencies--part of the organized American Jewish community, and the
evangelical Christian right--in supporting Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's
positions vis-a-vis the Palestinians.

The administration's policy seemingly changed on the eve of the invasion
and occupation of Iraq, when Bush, after months of delay, endorsed the
Quartet's roadmap. He thereby accepted a policy position that required
immediate concessions from Israel with regard to settlements and the
occupation--concessions that the president had hitherto sought to
postpone to a more advanced stage of the process, after the Palestinians
had chosen a new leader and ended terrorism.

The roadmap timeline--Bush's enthusiastic pre-war endorsement of the
document in March 2003, pressure to appoint a new Palestinian prime
minister (winter-spring 2003), and a high profile post-war ceremonial
launching (June 2003)--points to the war in Iraq as a major American
strategic consideration in calibrating the timing and degree of US
commitment.

Here the guiding American policy principle appears to have been that if
the US was seen to be sincerely trying to end the violence and restore
the peace process, this would help it prior to the war in Iraq in
recruiting allies and blunting opposition in Europe and the Arab world.
Once the war was over, a successful roadmap process would ensure the
ongoing goodwill of Iraq's neighbors, just as success in democratizing
Iraq would redound positively on the Israeli-Palestinian arena, in
keeping with the much talked about positive domino effect.

In this sense, the subsequent post-war decline in American efforts to
facilitate the roadmap mainly reflects the administration's growing
sense of distress in Iraq, along with the constraints of US presidential
elections in late 2004. With all due respect to Bush's religious fervor
in presenting his roadmap process to Arab leaders ("I'm on a mission
from God"), it was old-fashioned considerations of realpolitik that took
over when the going got rough. The needs of Bush's potential voters took
primacy: the administration reverted to a conflict-management mode; it
ceased to enforce its own peace plan.

How then, do we explain the current flurry of US criticism and pressures
on Israel? President Bush has publicly called for Israel to dismantle
outposts, cease expanding settlements and reroute the fence. The US
supported the Russian initiative for the UN Security Council to endorse
the roadmap. It has deducted nearly $300 million from loan guarantees as
a penalty for Israeli investments in the settlements and the fence. And
Secretary of State Colin Powell and Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul
Wolfowitz have spoken approvingly of informal Palestinian-Israeli peace
initiatives.

One explanation is Sharon's mistakes and failings. The administration
was reportedly livid over his transparent attempts to "legalize"
outposts so that roadmap demands no longer apply to them. It is shocked
by the deal he's intent on doing, with the help of "old Europe"
(Germany), with Hizballah, a major terrorist enemy. And it is keenly
aware of growing criticism of the prime minister by senior serving and
former Israeli security officials and by the Israeli public.

A second is the administration's apparent determination that, despite
election year considerations, it cannot afford to allow Israel to ignore
the "red lines" it has laid down over recent months concerning
settlements and cooperation with new Palestinian governments. It is
serving notice that, precisely because it wants relative peace and quiet
in the Israeli-Palestinian sector for the coming election year, Sharon
should not take it for granted, and Israel has to accept certain
restrictions on its initiatives.

At the end of the day, this is in no way a crisis in US-Israel
relations--something neither side wants. What the administration appears
to seek for the coming year is a relatively low profile for our
conflict, meaning no provocations from either side--even if the roadmap
process is not advanced.

Sharon's response--a PR flurry of ambiguous hints of new initiatives,
bilateral and unilateral--and the solidification of Yasser Arafat's
power as supreme Palestinian leader, both appear to indicate that
neither side has yet developed a realistic strategy for peace. Under
these circumstances, only an energetic American commitment will make a
difference. And that is not about to happen.

