"Is the roadmap                                                  dead?"
Before addressing this question, one may remember that many observers,
including myself, maintained all along that in its present form there
were too many "holes" in it to make it work. It suffices to mention the
unworkable timetables or the absence of what Israel sees as an absolute
must--the annulment of the so-called "right of return." Even the
"vision" of a "democratic, viable Palestinian state" living in peace
alongside Israel, inevitably raises the question of why the projected
Palestinian state should be different from most other Arab states?

However, the most substantial issue is the imperative to stop
Palestinian terror and violence. This was especially important to
Israelis after the abject failure of the Oslo agreement, the breakdown
of the Barak-Clinton initiative at Camp David, and the outbreak of
Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat's "al Aqsa intifada". The current
Israeli government thus sees the end of terror as crucial for a
meaningful political process. This was reinforced, both in Israel and in
the US, after 9/11 and the Bush administration's clear and unequivocal
stand against terrorism. The roadmap, in spite of several attempts by
members of the Quartet to shift the emphasis, mandated clearly that the
Palestinian Authority must begin "sustained, targeted and effective
operations" to dismantle terrorist infrastructure, etc. None of that
happened. Instead, the Palestinian Authority concluded a temporary
ceasefire (/hudna/) with Hamas and Islamic Jihad that was used by those
groups as a breather to regroup and rearm, and it soon became evident
that the terror groups did not regard the hudna as an absolute stop to
violence--nor did Arafat.

At the time of writing, the internal Palestinian political situation is
far from clear, and the outcome of the crisis is bound to have an impact
on the future of the roadmap. Another important element is the currently
insufficient concrete support the "map" enjoys from the Arab world. As
Dennis Ross recently wrote: "Prime Minister Abbas needs the cover of
Arab legitimacy to confront Hamas, Islamic Jihad and the al-Aqsa Brigades."

The usual Palestinian explanation for failing to act against the
terrorists is that they do not want to risk civil war, though it is far
from clear whether a more determined action would in fact have led to
civil war--or whether this argument is but a subterfuge to refrain from
action. Be this as it may, Israelis wonder whether the present
Palestinian political crisis is not just a contest between Arafat who
doesn't /want/ to deliver and Abbas who /can't/ (or at least doesn't
want to get his feet wet in /trying/ to deliver). Paradoxically,
Israel's renewed military operations against the terrorists might now
give the roadmap a new lease on life--with Israel doing the Palestinians
"dirty work". Though Washington has few remaining illusions about the
Abbas government, it has not given up on it yet, but it has left no
doubt as to where the main responsibility lies for the crisis in the
roadmap.

"But what about the settlements?" Though this subject must indeed come
up sooner or later, the equation between /stopping/ terror and
/freezing/ settlements looks to most Israelis disingenuous. On the other
hand, had the Palestinian Authority lived up to its primary obligations
with regard to fighting terror, this would have put the onus for
continuing the process squarely on Israel. At present, Prime Minister
Sharon, facing increasing opposition from inside his own party and
coalition with regard to several aspects of the roadmap, is not even
required to face some of the more difficult decisions in it.

The Bush administration's Middle East policy was based on three
interrelated points: victory in Iraq, reform and democratization of the
Arab world, and "solving" the Arab-Jewish conflict. After years of
America projecting an image of being a "paper tiger", Middle Easterners
looked in awe, though not always with glee, at America's decisive and
swift military victory over Saddam Hussein.

Basically, this attitude has not yet changed. The "link" between
America's enhanced position and the Palestinian-Israeli equation was
that Palestinians were given to understand that only if they renounced
terror, and only with American support, could they realize part of their
aspirations. Palestinians also hoped that given America's overall design
for the Middle East, pressure would be put on Israel to make concessions
beyond those the latter was ready to make. However, as long as
Palestinian terror continues--especially with Yasir Arafat trying to
reassume absolute power--the chances for this scenario to materialize
are highly doubtful, even without involving ourselves in American
domestic politics.

Much will indeed depend on how the US pursues its aims with regard to
Iraq. America's precipitate withdrawal, 20 years ago, from Beirut led to
decades of losing face in the Middle East--and indirectly to many of the
region's upheavals. But Iraq and creating a durable framework for
Persian Gulf and regional security are far more important than Beirut
ever was! Palestinians, like others in the Middle East, will therefore
carefully watch how the US deals with the Iraqi situation--and draw
their conclusions accordingly.

So, is there still a chance for the roadmap? Though some argue that it
was stillborn in the first place, one could also make a case that after
some thorough retooling it could yet lead to positive results. Setting
the sights a bit lower, and provided the difficult first stage can be
overcome, the "map" could still function as a general compass to bring
the two sides to a long-term "modus vivendi" which, though short of
solving all the outstanding issues (e.g., Jerusalem, holy places, or the
final borders of the future Palestinian entity) would nevertheless put
an end to violence and give the two peoples an extended period of calm
and prosperity.

Full fledged idyllic "comprehensive" peace between Israel and the
Palestinians will probably have to wait for generational changes--but,
after all, this would not be so different from what history has shown in
other parts of the world, including Europe: first pragmatic arrangements
and only then permanent peace.

