The troubled circumstances of Palestinians in the occupied territories
today most aptly demonstrate the extent and depth of the fascism of the
Israeli occupation. Systematic acts of assassination are at their
height. More and more Palestinian mothers and families have their hearts
broken at the hands of what I call the "slaughter of Sharon." This is
taking place to deafening Arab silence and in the midst of international
ineptitude. The curfews continue and Israeli jails continue to fill with
Palestinian prisoners in intolerable conditions. In addition, the new
Berlin wall, a wall of isolation, continues to snake through Palestinian
land. In other words, one might say that, for Palestinians, the roadmap
                                                 has been turned into a
path of blood, anguish and suffering.

At the same time, and I write this with deep regret and sorrow, we have
a Palestinian cabinet headed by Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) that continues
to engage in political mismanagement. In my view, this mismanagement is
negatively affecting Palestinian national interests tremendously.
Incongruently, and despite the dramatic state of affairs I have just
described, Abu Mazen's government has not called for suspending talks
with the Israeli occupation institution, but has instead called for
cutting off talks with Palestinian resistance groups. Instead of
directing its anger and its energies at pressuring the Israeli
government to end its violations, we find this government almost across
the board doing its best to weaken the struggle against the occupation.

Several statements by cabinet ministers damning the Palestinian
resistance have contributed to the recent escalation of tensions within
Palestinian society. The assassination of Hamas leader Ismail Abu Shanab
by Israeli warplanes interrupted the beginnings of a serious Palestinian
feud. A cabinet whose ministers consider Palestinian resistance--not the
tenacity and belligerence of the Israeli occupation--damaging to
Palestinian national interests does not express the feelings of the
Palestinian street and does not represent Palestinian ambitions. (It
must be said that not every minister in this government bears the same
culpability, and some statements of sanity have made their way through
the fog.)

Who is it that defines Palestinian national interests more so than the
active and the functional political forces on the ground? These are
forces that emanate out of Palestinian suffering--deep suffering--and it
is these forces that work diligently to put an end to Palestinian
suffering, not this or that cabinet minister.

Today, the Palestinian situation is in a precarious position and it is
time for wisdom and rationality to dominate over conspiratorial tactics.
The symbol of Palestinian nationalism, Yasser Arafat, deserves this; the
difficult struggle endured by the Palestinian people merits this; and
the retention of Palestinian rights, which are in my view more sacred
than the land itself and all its holy sites, make this imperative. The
sanctity of our rights demands the semblance of stability.

The United States, for its part, seems to be terribly pleased that it
has found domestic tools that will work diligently to achieve its
objectives in Palestinian society. These objectives, which are bound to
fail, mean to weaken the Palestinian struggle, to marginalize Yasser
Arafat and to work in a calculated way to assassinate him politically
and morally in the eyes of Palestinian society, which he loves and which
loves him. The role of the United States, which centers on meddling in
Palestinian politics to strengthen and maintain some members of the
Abbas government, does not take into account Palestinian interests nor
has it put an end to /any single aspect/ of the Israeli occupation. The
larger objective of the United States is to make the Palestinian
struggle unacceptable to Palestinians themselves; finding Palestinian
tools to achieve this has been a most gratifying development for the
Bush administration.

Let me give just one example. Why, instead of exerting pressure on the
Palestinian government to freeze the accounts of Islamic charitable
organizations, did not the Bush administration and the Palestinian
government itself work first to find a substitute for the thousands of
needy families that rely on those organizations for their daily bread?
Freezing these accounts and providing no alternative only strengthened
the Islamic movements, as they have now been handed a new mobilization
tool through which to shore up their backing in Palestinian society.

It is time for the Abbas government to save face and apologize to the
Palestinian people--a people that has contributed thousands of martyrs
and wounded to this struggle--for the recent comments of its ministers.
Indeed, it may be time for this government to courageously resign of its
own volition: first, because it is no longer acceptable to Palestinian
society, but more so because it is no longer accepted by Fateh, the
forefront of the Palestinian struggle.

This government can no longer shift the Palestinian people from one
political catastrophe to another. It is not acceptable for the
Palestinian government to move the Palestinian people further towards
fragmentation and dispersal. The situation that we find ourselves in has
no room for added experimentation with Palestinian lives and the destiny
of the Palestinian cause.

