United States President George W. Bush seems to have missed the point.
In his recent speech, he laid down very significant principles for a
final settlement between Palestinians and Israelis, including the need
to end the Israeli occupation ongoing since 1967, stop settlement
construction and establish a Palestinian state. But he also spent most
of his time diverting attention from the main cause of the current
confrontations and placing blame solely on the shoulders of Palestinians.

As such, the failure of President Bush's speech is not in its political
principles, but rather in its practicalities: he failed to show us how
these American-led efforts will move us out of the current situation
into the president's vision. The political contents of the speech
addressed the fundamental needs of both Palestinians and Israelis, i.e.,
the need to end the occupation and solve the refugee problem and
establish an independent Palestinian state, while fulfilling legitimate
Israeli needs for peace and security. Very practically, however, the
conditions placed on those promises swapped cause with effect, and
promoted the view that Palestinian violent activities are the reason for
this conflict, while in fact the 35-year-long Israeli occupation has
manifested itself in violent reactions from captive Palestinians.

In addition, the conditions Bush placed upon the fulfillment of a
peaceful resolution can only result in encouraging Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon to continue his current strategy of reoccupying
the Palestinian territories and using force to suppress the Palestinian
population with curfews, encirclement, demolition of houses and extra
judicial assassinations. According to the most recent report of Amnesty
International, some 400 Palestinians, including 79 children, were killed
in this manner in the last year alone. Sharon should not be encouraged
in his use of violence to achieve peace--not only is it contradictory,
but it simply won't work.

There are three main problems in the speech's portrayal of the conflict.
The first is that Bush has placed the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
squarely within the war against terrorism. Meanwhile, the rest of the
world believes that this conflict is about the Israeli occupation and
the struggle to end it, and that we are now seeing a rather typical
process of decolonization.

The second is that Bush approached this conflict advocating regime
change by attacking the Palestinian Authority, trying to delegitimize it
and expressly encouraging alternative leadership. On the one hand, this
is not very democratic of him. On the other, it is not consistent with
the American values that should have brought President Bush to respect
Palestinians' choice of leadership, a leadership that has recently
committed itself on record and legally to holding new elections in January.

The final problem of the Bush speech is its singling out one component
of this conflict, which is Palestinian armed activities (specifically
those directed at civilians), and trying to solve it in isolation of the
other components of the conflict--and even as a condition for solving
the other integral components. But, as we will soon see, the failure to
address other components such as Israeli violence against Palestinian
civilians and the ongoing occupation will only play into the hands of
Palestinians that promote the kind of violence Bush seems most concerned
about.

If, however, Bush had proposed a comprehensive package dealing with the
different components of the conflict in a balanced manner, he might well
have enjoyed success. That comprehensive package should include
requirements for Palestinians to stop armed activities, in particular
those against Israeli civilians (who are still just one fourth the
number of Palestinian civilians killed over the last 20 months). But it
must also give Palestinians a peaceful alternative for ending the
occupation in the form of a convincing political process to give
Palestinians hope that it is possible to reach an end of the occupation
and Israelis hope that it is possible to achieve peace and security.

The final component of this package should be an end to brutal Israeli
military operations that are on the one hand dramatically destroying the
Palestinian Authority and on the other, inflicting suffering on all
Palestinians through a policy of curfew that has 700,000 Palestinians
confined to their homes and another 1.4 million Palestinian confined in
their villages. The result of this has been to raise the number of
Palestinians unemployed or unable to get to work to a debilitating 78
percent. Certainly we can all agree that alleviating that dire situation
is one crucial step towards peace.

