Q: Would you say that there is a greater and greater
disconnect between international law and the implementation of such law
on the ground, most recently with regard to the wall?

A: The Israeli occupation has always brought with it a violation
of human rights if we look at the standard that should be but is not
implemented: international law and international humanitarian law. You
can give many examples of this, and one recent example is the wall.
Israel has said it will not implement or take notice of the Hague
decision or the United Nations General Assembly recommendation.

We feel, and this is always a worry to us as human rights activists,
that politics interferes with the implementation of human rights and
those who have the power can implement or not implement international
law as they see fit. In addition, what we notice now is that some
powerful countries like the United States want to make changes to
international law.

Q: What can human rights groups like your own do about
that, if the powerful are intent on having their way?

A: Of course we understand that the struggle for human rights is
a long struggle. Human rights activists mainly try to lobby and
influence international public opinion. International law came about
after World War I and II as a result of people's reaction to the mass
violations of human rights these wars embodied. So this is the main way
human rights activists can be effective, and we hope that through such
methods we can affect changes in international public opinion. And we
are somehow optimistic, because we notice that there are changes in
international opinion.

Q: How would you characterize the trend in human rights in
the past four years, both internally and vis-a-vis the occupation?

A:* Violations of human rights as a result of the occupation have
reached unprecedented levels. We are now talking about mass collective
punishments, including the checkpoints that restrict the right of
movement and the rights of people to access their places of work or
their land, as well as restrictions on the access to water. These
measures have affected the lives of all Palestinians. In addition there
are the assassinations, the demolition of houses, the continued
settlement building and lately, and another thing that has affected the
lives of all Palestinians, the building of the wall. All of this is
prohibited by international law. What we see is that all these
violations have continued and increased.

In addition, we notice that within the so-called peace process, the
security issue has become the overriding issue, and an issue at odds
with the human rights issue, which makes us worry about the prevalent
view about how to deal with the situation.

Within Palestinian society there are also violations. We monitor the
violations of the Palestinian National Authority (PNA), which is why as
an organization when we talk about violations we also take into
consideration violations of the Authority. Before the Intifada there
were mass arrests and torture. Now there is no rule of law and without
the rule of law nothing can be implemented. There is a lot of discussion
and lobbying within the Palestinian community at the moment about
elections, because we believe that holding elections is one of the
important mechanisms to make changes within Palestinian society and to
ensure accountability. But we also notice that both internally and
internationally there is no pressure to ensure this process, while for
other issues, like security, there is a lot of pressure.

Q: Your organization deals with prisoners' rights. What is
the current status of prisoners' rights?

A: There is constant violation of conventions regarding
prisoners. I will not talk politically here; I will talk only about the
rights of prisoners according to minimum international standards. There
are numerous Israeli violations of these standards, including the
provision of adequate healthcare, the number of prisoners per cell, the
standard of food, and so on. Even though the Israel High Court in 1999
ruled that the use of torture should be stopped, we see that torture
continues being used. Prisoners are held in isolation for long stretches
and lawyers are not allowed access, which is a grievous violation.
Israeli organizations monitoring prisoner rights abuses last May issued
a report detailing violations not only of international standards but
also Israeli standards, and this is why there is now a case before the
Israeli high court, and there is discussion in the Israeli Knesset.
Yesterday a Knesset committee went to one prison to talk to prisoners.
This comes after much pressure from within Israel over the violation of
prisoners' rights.

We will continue our monitoring work and submit our reports to the UN
and other international bodies in coordination with international human
rights groups such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, as
well as other Palestinian human rights groups, to lobby against these
violations and improve the situation inside prisons.

