Negotiations are a process of mutual mapping, in which each of the sides
maps out the positions of the other, and tries to understand what might
be acceptable or unacceptable to it. Agreement becomes possible when
both sides succeed, through the mapping process, in formulating a
settlement that provides a solution equally beneficial to the vital
interests of each.

One of the principal reasons for the difficulties encountered by the
Oslo process from its inception was the failure of both sides to
comprehend one another's sensitivities. This failure contributed heavily
to the deep lack of trust between them. It helped bring about the
breakdown of the Camp David Summit, and the collapse of the entire
process in its aftermath.

Meanwhile contacts continue between Israelis and Palestinians,
particularly in informal tracks. Here the Israeli participants have
taken note that the Palestinians still entertain certain basic
misunderstandings concerning the sensitivities and "red lines" of
Israelis. Sometimes one has to wonder whether Israelis and Palestinians
are even speaking the same language (even when they are indeed both
speaking the same language, i.e., English, Hebrew or Arabic).

The first thing the Palestinians have difficulty understanding is that
each of the parties has its own narrative, and each is different from
the other. There is no chance whatsoever that Israelis will accept the
Palestinian narrative regarding the creation of the State of Israel and
the definition of justice that derives from it, and will agree that this
form the basis for defining the relationship between the two sides. Each
party has its own definition of justice. In the eyes of the Israeli
side, a fair settlement should provide a reasonable solution for the
vital needs of both parties; questions of narrative and historical
justice should be left to the historians.

Palestinians do not sufficiently understand Israelis' sense of
existential threat and vulnerability, among other reasons due to
Israel's image as a regional power. They don't appreciate the way this
sense of threat contributes to the perception of many Israelis that
issues like the refugees or, in the Palestinian term, the "right of
return," are existential threats to Israel. Nor do Palestinians
understand that it is Israeli threat perceptions that inform Israeli
security demands, and not some Israeli plot to "withdraw" ostensibly
from the occupied territories while in fact "staying".

Palestinian violence was a pernicious phenomenon throughout the Oslo
process, and to a large extent precipitated its failure. The
Palestinians never comprehended the depth of influence of Palestinian
violence on the Israeli perception of the chances of reaching a peaceful
settlement with them. Of course they understood that Israelis do not
want Palestinian violence, but they still thought of it as a tool that
could be employed or withdrawn at their whim, and ignored the malignant
effect of this behavior on Israeli thinking.

This misperception is linked to Palestinians' lack of understanding of
the difference in approach between themselves and Israel regarding the
nature of agreements. The Israeli approach is juridical, sticks closely
to the literal wording of the agreement, and insists on its execution to
the letter. Not infrequently the Palestinians pursue ambiguous or
equivocal wording that enables them to act in one way while representing
that they are doing the opposite, or to present an interpretation
favorable to their interests at a later juncture. To this we must add a
generally lenient approach to the very existence of agreements. This
misunderstanding has caused additional damage to Israeli trust in
Palestinians.

Note the difference in the attitude of Israelis toward Syria and the
Palestinians. Israelis have no particular affection for Syria, but they
respect that country for the way it honors the agreements it has signed.

The refugee issue provides an excellent illustration of the
misunderstandings surveyed thus far, insofar as even today they all find
expression in Palestinian positions:

    * The Palestinians insist that Israel accept their narrative and
      recognize the right of return, even if it is not actually applied.

    * They do not comprehend that in the Israeli perception even a
      feeble possibility of the return of refugees is an existential threat.

    * They do not understand the effect of the violence invoked by
      Israeli Arabs in October 2000 on the Israeli perception of the
      refugee issue.

    * In conversations with them, they are prepared to acknowledge that
      the refugees will in the end not return to Israel, but do not
      agree that this be detailed explicitly in an agreement. When the
      Israeli side argues that what they are proposing is not strong
      enough, and leaves an opening for the return of refugees, they
      offer answers that reflect their general approach toward
      agreements: it's not important, in reality no one will want to
return, and the like.

This article focused on Palestinian misunderstandings. But it recognizes
that similar misunderstandings regarding Palestinian sensitivities also
exist among Israelis.

