In such a deep and complicated conflict, misunderstandings about the
other side are to be expected. These misunderstandings result partially
from the increasing distance and lack of interaction between the two
sides, but are also caused by attempts to distort each other's positions
and ensure the incitement necessary to maintain public clamor for
ongoing hostilities or support for this leader or that. There are also
other factors, including cultural differences, that sometimes deepen
these misunderstandings.

For all these reasons, efforts to divine the real intentions, meanings
and justifications for the positions and practices of each side is a
crucial contribution to any reconciliation process, especially one that
is part of a peace process. The intellectuals of both sides might
shoulder that duty: their vision is perhaps clearer, and they have the
opportunity to dig deeply into the others' motives through direct
interaction and dialogue.

From a Palestinian perspective, the results of the Camp David
negotiations and the subsequent exchange of positions provide an ideal
example of Israeli misunderstanding or distortion of the Palestinian
position. As was to be expected, the refugee problem was one of the
issues that did not see significant progress in those talks. To be more
specific, while the Israeli side continued its well-known insistence on
refusing to accept the right of return and or the actual return of any
refugees, Palestinians insisted that the right of return and an actual
return (regardless of exact numbers) be part of the different components
of a solution of the refugee problem.

But the subsequent impression among Israeli politicians and the public,
however, was entirely skewed. They believed that the deadlock resulted
simply because Palestinians were "not serious" in considering the end of
occupation the end of the conflict. Israelis thought that after Israel
had accepted the central Palestinian demand of ending the occupation,
Palestinians were now only hedging because, in truth, they weren't
interested in living in peace side by side with Israel. Indeed, Israelis
thought that Palestinians were only holding on to the refugee issue in
order to undermine Israel by demanding the return of four to six million
Palestinian refugees and, therefore, demographically "conquering" the
Jewish state.

The truth is that Palestinians--the vast majority of the public and
their leadership--were serious in their willingness to genuinely
recognize Israel inside its 1967 borders, had the two sides come to an
agreement on ending the occupation and solving the refugee problem. They
had and have no intention of using the solution for the refugee problem
to gain a foothold in the lands of 1948; Palestinians have already made
that great compromise.

But Palestinians are equally genuine in their insistence that this
conflict cannot be terminated in good faith without finding a solution
for the refugee problem that reflects the relevant stipulations of
international law. What the negotiations must be about, therefore, is
maneuvering between the necessity of recognizing the right of return and
practicing that return, on the one hand, and honoring the Palestinians'
genuine commitment to recognize the state of Israel, on the other.

One notes that since public opinion is an important factor within
Palestine and Israel, and also regionally and internationally, it is
crucial to clarify the other sides' intentions through direct sources,
thereby reducing the damaging effects of misunderstandings and
distortions that can lead to an aggravation of hostility and a deepening
of the conflict.

Shed of these misunderstandings and distortions, suddenly, the conflict
becomes easy to solve. One finds, for example, that all most Israelis
want is the peaceful and secure borders of 1967, in addition to normal
regional relations and economic prosperity. The bottom line for
Palestinians, on the other hand, is a complete end to the occupation in
order to enjoy the natural and basic right of self-determination and
independence, as well as a solution to the refugee problem that combines
different components: recognition of the right of return, compensation,
resettlement, return to the Palestinian state and return to refugees'
original homes.

Palestinians want to arrive at this solution in a way that does not
infringe on their own basic rights and vital needs. But they are equally
not interested in infringing on the basic rights or vital needs of the
other side. Seen this way, the legitimate demands of the two sides do
not contradict each other. In this place of mutual recognition, peace is
possible.

