The May 25 decision of the government of Israel to ratify the roadmap
                                                 is instructive in ways
that go far beyond the immediate upshot of "launching" a new peace and
stabilization process. That process, incidentally, is not likely in and
of itself to bring peace. But it does reflect an important change in the
strategic scenery.

The most important development reflected in the government's
ratification is the apparent decision by United States President George
Bush to devote his prestige and energies to Arab-Israel peacemaking.
Following upon two years of "hands off" policy toward the Arab-Israel
conflict, this is a welcome development. Whether we have the Iraq war to
thank, or British Prime Minister Blair's pressure, or Bush's own growing
self-confidence as a statesman, we may never know. Nor is it clear how
long and how intensively Bush intends to pursue and pressure for an
Israeli-Palestinian peace process. But at least he has begun; without
his involvement, there is simply no chance whatsoever under the present
circumstances for progress to be registered. Without Bush's role,
Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) would not have been
appointed; and without his pressure on Israeli Prime Minister Sharon,
the roadmap would not have been ratified.

Bush's involvement and virtual "ownership" of the roadmap (which, lest
we forget, is technically a Quartet document), also mean that Washington
is now, unequivocally, the center of Israel-Arab peacemaking. This is an
important development for all interested parties. If the Israeli left,
for example, wants to have some input into the process, it should focus
its efforts on Washington before Jerusalem. And if the other three
members of the Quartet, Russia, the European Union and the United
Nations, want to continue to exercise influence, they are best advised
to concentrate on keeping Bush in the process, rather than keeping
Sharon or Abu Mazen involved.

A careful reading of the language of the government of Israel's
resolution ratifying the roadmap appears to indicate that nothing has
changed in Sharon's strategic approach. Unfortunately, this is good news
for the Israeli right, which should recognize--despite its condemnations
of Sharon--that the prime minister's maneuvering represents their best
chance to hold onto the settlements and avoid a productive peace
process. And it is bad news for the forces of peace. Sharon's current
position is entirely consistent with his advocacy of a Palestinian
"state" divided into enclaves that take up around 50 percent of the
territories, and that does not involve the dismantling of settlements,
which in his view serve a permanent strategic defensive purpose. Hence
the only guarantee of additional progress under Sharon is pressure by
Bush, and even that will become less productive the moment settlements
become a central factor.

The Israel government's decision ratifies "steps set out in the roadmap"
rather than the roadmap itself, thereby reflecting Sharon's insistence
that the roadmap be sequential (beginning with Palestinian steps on
security) rather than parallel (Israeli confidence-building measures,
dismantling of outposts and freezing of settlements in parallel with
Palestinian security measures), and that Israel has the right to pick
and choose which demands it will comply with. This approach is
reinforced by the "14 points" that the US is committed to "address":
while some are relatively benign, their overall thrust is to insist on
Palestinian compliance first, and to refuse to accept roadmap
foundations and demands, such as reopening Palestine Liberation
Organization offices in Jerusalem and the Saudi/Arab League initiative
of March 2002, that are politically or ideologically problematic for
Sharon.

In view of the many reservations, disclaimers and nuances Sharon has
attached to the roadmap, the most favorable development that we can now
contemplate is fulfillment of phase I. This is no mean task, and could
have an immensely beneficial effect on the way the Israeli and
Palestinian publics alike view the notion of returning to a peace
process. Above all, it will require Abu Mazen and his security chief,
Mohammad Dahlan, to register quick and visible progress toward reducing
Palestinian terrorism--lest a single suicide bombing with heavy Israeli
casualties set back what little momentum the roadmap has developed. And
it will require heavy pressure from President Bush on both Sharon and
the Palestinians, along with assistance and support from friendly Arab
states like Egypt and Jordan.

Assuming the Palestinians can deliver on security, then at some point
not too far down the road Sharon will be abandoned by his right wing
coalition partners and invite Labor into the coalition. If President
Bush remains committed despite growing election constraints on his
freedom of maneuver, we may, in the best case contingency, witness a
dramatic stabilization of the situation in accordance with phase I.

That is the most we can hope for from the roadmap in the coming year and
a half, until after elections in the US, and almost certainly as long as
Yasir Arafat remains the Palestinian eminence grise and Ariel Sharon
remains prime minister of Israel. But success in phase I could also
precipitate welcome changes in both the Israeli and the Palestinian
political leaderships.

