Today, the political timetable of elections in the United States, Israel
and the Palestinian Authority is dictating the nature of attempts to
stabilize the Israeli-Palestinian confrontation and to renew the peace
process.

Elections influenced the peace process in the past, too. The best
example is the postponement of the Israeli withdrawal from Hebron
decided upon by the Peres government on the eve of the 1996 elections.
The Taba talks held shortly before prime ministerial elections in 2001
were a last minute attempt to offer concessions to the Palestinians in
order to strengthen Ehud Barak's chances among left-wing voters and with
Arab voters who boycotted the elections.

Today the influence of elections on the peace process is evident long
before election day. And a combination of political constraints felt by
the three main actors in the arena is paralyzing the peace process.

The American administration's activities in the Middle East are heavily
influenced by US election considerations. The Republicans need Jewish
voters and contributors for the November 2002 midterm elections.
President George W. Bush has no desire to enter into a dispute with
Israel when polls show a rise in Jewish support for the Republicans
during his tenure.

When the leaders of Egypt and Saudi Arabia presented Bush with their
peace program, they took into account the "Jewish factor." They proposed
declaring an interim Palestinian state after the upcoming congressional
elections, while postponing a permanent status agreement until after the
November 2004 presidential elections--when, they assumed, a second term
president would be unencumbered by fears of Jewish retribution at the
polls. Bush adopted part of their advice, and in his speech of June 24
proposed that a permanent status agreement be completed within three
years, i.e., safely into his second term. Nor is the administration's
growing involvement with a war against Iraq devoid of considerations
involving the upcoming elections and the Republicans' desire to divert
the public debate from economic problems to the war against terrorism.

In Israel we cannot know whether the current government will survive
through to the completion of its term on October 28, 2003, or will hold
early elections in the spring, or even in January. Against this
uncertain background, preparations for primaries have begun in the Labor
Party and the Likud. Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, under pressure from
his rival Binyamin Netanyahu, has been moving to the right; he no longer
talks about a Palestinian state as he did last summer. In the Labor
Party the dynamic is the opposite: party Chairman Binyamin Ben Eliezer
has been obliged to move to the left by building a separation fence (to
neutralize one rival, Haim Ramon) and engineering a local ceasefire and
removing settlement outposts (against his new rival, Amram Mitzna).

Sharon is well aware of the influence of the ballot box on diplomacy. In
his dealings with the US administration prior to the Bush speech of June
2002, he threatened to invoke his "doomsday weapon": early elections.
"Of course I'll be reelected, but first we'll have six months of
paralysis," he warned senior administration officials. The same tactic,
only in reverse, is being invoked by Sharon's bitter enemy, Palestinian
Authority Chairman Yasir Arafat. The Palestinian leader wants to use the
ballot box to maneuver his way out of the international isolation that
Bush and Sharon have imposed on him. Arafat and his entourage have
decided on new elections for the PA on January 15, 2003, based on the
Oslo formula. Under current circumstances, Arafat is expected to win a
new mandate from the public that will oblige his supporters in Europe to
lend him a helping hand.

This is why there is no enthusiasm in Israel for Palestinian elections.
Sharon sees them as a trick to keep Arafat in power, while Foreign
Minister Shimon Peres warns that the extreme positions the candidates
will feel obliged to invoke will simply perpetuate the conflict. The
Israel Defense Forces? Planning Branch assesses that Palestinian
elections will not take place before the end of 2003. This assessment
was presented to the political echelon, and corresponds perfectly with
the government's own constraints: the Palestinians will only vote after
elections in Israel, and the decision regarding an IDF withdrawal from
the PA in order to facilitate elections will fall upon the next government.

The US administration proposed a compromise: elections in the spring of
2003, after the Palestinian election law is changed and reforms are
introduced that place a "prime minister" at the top of the PA pyramid
and relegate Arafat to symbolic status. The main inducement for
Palestinians is IDF withdrawal from their lands. But the current PA
leadership, which does not want to commit political suicide, frowns upon
the idea; nor is the extent of American determination clear.

When the leaders are busy with domestic constraints there is little
likelihood of advancing the process. It seems probable that the
stalemate in the Israeli-Palestinian process will prevail at least until
elections in Israel, or until the war in Iraq, which itself is not
divorced from the electoral timetable. The anticipation of an American
offensive that is liable to provoke Iraqi missile attacks on Israel
tends to strengthen the cohesiveness of the Israeli government, and
reduces the chances of early elections. And all this guarantees a
prolonged period of political "treading water".

