Democracy and democratic elections are in theory a vehicle towards
progress in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict simply because they empower
the public, which is presumably interested in peace. In practice,
however, democracy and elections can be a double-edged sword.

Our concrete and practical experience shows us that democratic
competition and elections increase the politicians? appetite for gaining
public support by pleasing the public, which is sometimes led by
emotional motives and short-sighted considerations. Populist politics
can sometimes be driven by a lack of knowledge and is not always
conducive to the real interest of Palestinians and Israelis, which is
reducing tension rather than increasing it.

The Israeli experience shows that elections sometimes have had positive
consequences in the cause of peace, while other times they have proved
disastrous. The conclusion of many significant sectors in the Israeli
public that Yitzhak Shamir was not doing enough to seize the first-ever
opportunity for peace, the opportunity opened in Madrid and Washington,
led to the election of Yitzhak Rabin--someone more likely to take
advantage of the cracked door.

On the other hand, an enemy of peace like Ariel Sharon was also able to
manipulate the public in order to create an anti-peace government
through elections, successfully exploiting the difficulties of trying to
make peace. As history has unfortunately shown, the phenomenon of
democratic elections producing anti-peace and anti-democracy and
sometimes anti-humanity leadership is not unique to Israel.

The sword cuts both ways on the Palestinian side, as well. The first and
last elections that the Palestinians were guaranteed produced a victory
for the peace camp and a big victory for democratic elections. Of
course, that wasn't a coincidence, but rather the result of achievements
by that same peace camp, seen in the Oslo Agreements and the beginning
of Israel's gradual withdrawal from the Palestinian territories. There
was hope in 1996 (or maybe the illusion) that the peace process
introduced by that leadership could bring about an end to Israeli
occupation.

Unfortunately, the repetition of those democratic elections within the
current atmosphere, one in which the peace process has failed and a
political vacuum has taken over, will give the upper hand in any future
elections to a very different camp in Palestinian politics. I don't mean
Hamas, because Hamas is unlikely to participate in the elections. But
the political center of Palestinian life has growing increasingly
skeptical about this political process--the only kind of "peace"
Palestinians have ever known.

In other words, while democracy and elections can be an important
vehicle towards solving the conflict, they must be accompanied by the
kind of political atmosphere conducive to enhancing the opportunities
for peace. Indeed, if elections here are pursued in the wrong political
atmosphere, they might backfire. That is no reason to argue against
holding elections, but it is reason to nurture political initiative and
process that can equip the right camp on both sides to take advantage of
elections in the cause of peace.

