The relationship between human rights and conflict is a complex,
multidimensional one. With the conflagration of the conflict in the fall
of 2000, human rights violations increased dramatically in scale and
intensity. In the past three years and ten months, over 3,800 people
have been killed, tens of thousands have been wounded, thousands of
houses have been destroyed, and hundreds of thousands of people have
been placed under siege. The conflict has wrought poverty, humiliation,
hostility, and polarization. Though human rights are also violated in
societies at peace, such violations are endemic to a conflict like our own.

Yet human rights violations are not merely a result of the conflict,
they are also a cause. It is impossible to adequately explain the
collapse of the Oslo process and the explosion of violence in September
2000 without mentioning the expansion of settlements, the daily
humiliation of Palestinians by Israeli forces, and the targeting of
Israeli civilians by Palestinian suicide bombers. Though these phenomena
are generally seen through a political lens, they are all also human
rights violations.

It is rare to see the statistic I have cited above: over 3,800 people
killed as a direct result of this conflict since September 2000. Most
casualty statistics perpetuate a zero-sum mentality that compares
Palestinian and Israeli deaths. This macabre accounting of how many have
been killed on "my" side versus "your" side stands in stark contrast to
the most basic tenet of human rights: the idea that every human being
has equal rights, and that the life of a Palestinian child, for example,
is of equal worth to the life of an Israeli child.

Recognition of the universality of human rights, however, does not
obscure the fundamental asymmetry of this conflict. Israel maintains a
military occupation over some 3.6 million Palestinians with an
apartheid-like separation of Jews and Palestinians, whereby one's
rights, benefits and access to resources are determined by one's
national identity. This is not to say that Israelis are not victims of
human rights violations as well. Indeed, the targeted attacks on Israeli
civilians are almost universally recognized as war crimes. However,
Israeli organizations like B'Tselem focus on the actions of their own
government, and their government systematically violates Palestinian
rights, while devoting enormous resources to protect Israelis. Thus
Israeli organizations are in the unique position of defending the human
rights of "the other" or even the enemy in this conflict.

It is clear that we will never enjoy full human rights in a situation of
occupation and conflict, and therefore resolution of the conflict is
essential to protecting human rights. This does not mean that there is
an easy symbiosis between human rights and conflict resolution. In fact,
human rights violations are as frequently justified in the name of
conflict resolution as they are by the conflict itself. Governments on
the left and the right have persecuted the "opponents of peace," placing
detractors in administrative detention, torturing them and deporting
them. One of the primary roles of the human rights community is to state
unequivocally that the ends cannot justify the means. Not even the lofty
goal of resolving this conflict and bringing peace to Israelis and
Palestinians can justify violation of fundamental human rights.

Human rights organizations must be actively involved in resolving this
conflict. Though we do not take a position on political issues, any
diplomatic solution must also accord with all sides' legal obligations.
There is a utilitarian reason to include human rights in conflict
resolution: we learned from the Oslo process that a peace process that
ignores human rights violations is vulnerable at its core, perhaps even
doomed to failure. Yet human rights are also a moral imperative
regardless of their utilitarian merits.

It is therefore a mistake for diplomatic initiatives like the roadmap to
treat a settlement freeze, an end to house demolitions or lifting the
siege on Palestinian communities solely as confidence-building measures.
These are legal obligations that Israel must uphold regardless of any
progress in negotiations.

The same is true of the separation barrier, Palestinian refugees,
Israeli settlements and the future status of Jerusalem - all these must
be understood not only as political issues, but also as issues
implicating legal obligations that must be respected. Just as human
rights violations are a cause of conflict, no conflict can be
successfully resolved without taking human rights and international
humanitarian law into account.

