Human rights were always one of the main battlegrounds in the ongoing
struggle between the Palestinian people and the Israeli occupation.
Firstly, this is because throughout the occupation there have always
been consistent and systematic violations of Palestinian human rights.
Secondly, Palestinians have used these violations to attract sympathy on
the international level and in order to convince the international
community that Israel's military occupation is not only illegal but
belligerent.

There are different levels of dealing with the issue of human rights
from a Palestinian perspective. The first and most obvious is the use of
the criteria of the relevant international laws, specifically the Geneva
Conventions which deal, among other things, with the legal regulation of
relations between occupied and occupier.

Israel has systematically been violating these international
humanitarian laws. Most egregiously, it has confiscated land from the
occupied people and settled its own citizens in occupied territory. From
there follows a long list of other violations including, but not
restricted to, the deportation of Palestinians to outside the occupied
territories, the demolition of houses, the assassination of individuals
and restrictions imposed on socio-economic life.

There is, however, another level of human rights violations that might
be more harmful though less obvious. This is the systematic humiliation
that is inflicted upon individuals in most aspects of their daily lives,
a treatment that affects the dignity of individuals, families,
institutions and the nation at large. Such humiliation is particularly
evident at checkpoints, crossing points and other routine points of
contact between Israeli occupiers and Palestinian individuals, but is
also clear in the way Israel deals with Palestinian needs on a macro
level, such as the treatment of the Palestinian Authority, the siege
imposed on the elected president of the Palestinian people, the
unnecessary delays imposed on imports and exports, the restrictions on
and difficulties with the supply of water to populated areas and so on.

The significance of this second level of human rights violation - the
ubiquitous humiliation and the assault on people's dignity - is that it
has the effect of deepening the hatred and hostility and increasing the
desire for revenge and the atmosphere of violence. Consequently, this
level only serves to accelerate and widen the ongoing vicious circle of
violence.

Above all these considerations, however, probably the most damaging
violation of Palestinian human rights is the Israeli denial of the
Palestinian people as a nation with a right to self-determination and
the consequent Israeli refusal to deal with the Palestinians as a people
with the same rights that any other people deserves and would enjoy. The
continuity of this denial will ensure the continuity of the conflict.
And vice-versa: an Israeli recognition of the Palestinian people as a
nation with a right to self determination and statehood in accordance
with international legality and on the borders of 1967 will lead to an
end to the other violations of Palestinian human rights, and thus the
gradual end to hostilities and the building of normal relations. 

