Q: What do you think is the key factor that Israelis do not
understand about Palestinians?

A: I think that there are two types of fundamental things. One is
that they don't understand what we want and what we are upset about. The
other thing is that they don't really understand how we live. Because
they don't understand the latter, they can't really understand the former.

It seems so incredible to us, but it is true: most Israelis don't
understand that all we want is an end to the occupation. No matter what
we do, that message does not seem to sink in. They don't believe that in
our heart of hearts, we have given up on all of historic Palestine.

There is a difference between knowing and belief. Israelis never really
believed that we accepted the two-state solution. It seems a little bit
crazy--why would anyone accept to take only part of what was originally
theirs? They don't believe that deeply and profoundly the vast majority
of Palestinians solely want the end of the occupation and have
emotionally let go of the hope of getting back historic Palestine.

Second, Israelis don't know what our everyday reality is and haven't
known for some time. They didn't know it all though Oslo, the interim
period, and that is why they couldn't understand the Intifada. They
really believed that everything was getting better for us and things
were moving forward.

We find it astounding that they don't know what curfew and closure is.
They vaguely see it on the news, but they actually have no idea what our
everyday reality is like. I find this often from talking to Israelis.
What is even more stunning is when this comes from Israelis who care and
are involved.

Q: Can you give an example?

A: I remember taking a long-term Israeli peace activist to see the
settlements around Jerusalem. She was completely shocked. She said, "I
don't really want to see them, because they upset me." Well, if you get
that from activists, then you know that the vast majority doesn't really
want to know.

This happens in most situations of colonialism and national and ethnic
conflict; the dominant group does not want to face what they are doing
to the dominated group. Therefore, it is that much harder for Israelis
to understand why we are so enraged that we made a massive
compromise--accepting only 22 percent [of historic Palestine]--and that
was not good enough for them.

Q: What do you think is the result of these misunderstandings?

A: I put most of the blame for the situation we are in on the past
Labor government. [Former Prime Minister Ehud] Barak and [foreign
minister Shlomo] Ben Ami were founder and creator of all the lies that
[Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon was then able to use.

Now Israelis have this fear and paranoia that we don't want peace and
that we want to destroy them, which allowed Sharon to be elected. All of
the incredible sense of betrayal that Palestinians felt over the peace
process is now buried under the "fact" that we are all somehow
terrorists and want to destroy Israel. This right-wing government is
using this as a cover to undo us, to destroy the Palestinian Authority,
to send the whole Palestinian national project back into oblivion.

Q: There are those who believe that the mask will soon fall
away, that there will be a recognition of how close things were and then
there will be a deal. What do you see happening?

A: I think that the mask always gets taken off much too late. Look
at America's "dirty tricks" in Central America and Vietnam and
Iran-Contra. The truth comes out when it has no power to change things
anymore.

What I do think is that this sort of slow exhaustion and breaking down
of both societies is going to eventually lead to a point--I don't know
when--where we will have to find a technical solution. This will
probably be in the form of unilateral separation.

This is one of the things that we Palestinians cannot completely see:
this situation is very traumatic for Israelis and they would like an
exit. But it will not be an exit of discovery. I wish. But I don't think
it will be.

