The most important aspect of the new relationship developing among
Syria, Israel and the United States is perhaps the least noticed: Syria
under President Bashar al Asad is, for the first time in decades, not a
candidate for an American-brokered peace process with Israel. Instead,
it is increasingly exposed to US sanctions, Israeli military pressure,
and possibly even eventual American military action.

The wages of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict are only one aspect of
this dramatic deterioration in Syria's status--but an important one.
Asad, upon whom the mantle of leadership was cruelly thrust by his late
father's cronies three years ago despite his lack of political maturity,
has apparently not yet figured out that Damascus' ongoing support for
Hamas and Islamic Jihad and collaboration with Iran and Hizballah
against Israel (all of which ostensibly have constituted business as
usual in Syria for many years now) no longer play out the same way, not
only in Jerusalem, but--more importantly--in Washington. In former years
Asad's late father, Hafez, could engage in peace negotiations with
Israel while refusing to meet Israelis face-to-face, sheltering Hamas
and Islamic Jihad and invoking Hizballah violence against Israel as
part-and-parcel of his negotiating tactics--and get away with it. The
terms of reference have changed.

This is so, first and foremost, because of the events of 9/11.
Washington now views Syria in the Iraqi context--as a collaborator with
anti-American forces. President George W. Bush's administration has
decided to deal with terrorism and its supporters with increasing doses
of brute force or, at a minimum, coercive politics (e.g., the Syria
Accountability Act passed by Congress in October), even when, as in Iraq
and Afghanistan, the score sheet for this strategy is at best ambiguous.

All of this has undoubtedly emboldened Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's
government in Israel to call Syria to account more aggressively than in
the past regarding its support for anti-Israel terrorists, just as it
has laid the blame squarely on Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat for
attacks by most other Palestinian terrorists. In this sense, the Israel
Air Force's unprecedented October 5 attack against a nearly deserted
training camp north of Damascus, in retaliation for the previous day's
terrorist atrocity in Haifa perpetrated by Islamic Jihad, reflected both
an American green light and the logic of the Bush-Sharon position on
terrorism.

But it also bore witness to Sharon's sense of desperation that (given
the American prohibition on removing Arafat by force) he is running out
of tactics and targets for dealing with Palestinian terrorism in
general. The October 5 attack was modest and calculated: it focused on a
seemingly low-level objective, and was preceded several weeks earlier by
an Israel Air Force fly by over Asad's villa in Latakia in northern
Syria. But retaliatory attacks (however justified) on Syria, if pursued,
will have to escalate, thereby risking eventual Syrian reprisals. Syrian
Foreign Minister Farouk al Shara threatened in late October to attack
the Israeli-occupied Golan in response, while Hizballah let loose
another extended barrage against Israeli forces in the Shaba Farms area.

There are very senior security planners in Israel, like Minister of
Defense Shaul Mofaz and his chief of political-security staff, Major
General (res.) Amos Gilad, who reportedly relish the notion of
administering a major beating to the Syrian armed forces, or at least
threatening to do so in the way the Turks did very successfully several
years ago, when they compelled Hafez al Asad to cease supporting
anti-Turkish Kurdish forces based in Syria. But there are two major
differences between then and now. Then, Asad the father could be
depended on to make the smart decision and back off from a confrontation
with an obviously stronger rival; now, Asad the son can only be
described by comparison as a loose cannon, fully capable of making
unpredictable moves. Then, there was no Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
whereas now it is generally agreed that one of Arafat's goals in the
three-year-old intifada is precisely to broaden the conflict by dragging
in additional Arab countries on his side.

Thus Israeli escalation with Syria might play right into Arafat's hands.
It could also create a dangerous escalatory link, both geographic and
strategic, between the Iraqi theater of combat and the
Palestinian-Israeli arena, with untold consequences for the broader
Middle East.

Readers will recall that I have frequently suggested that none of the
relevant leaders engaged in the Palestinian issue--Sharon, Arafat, and
Bush--has a realistic strategy for peace, even though they all profess
to be seeking an end to the current conflict.

We can now certainly add Syria's Bashar al Asad to the list. Yet the
risks and dangers of a possible Israeli military escalation with Syria
only underline a basic reality: the solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict (or for that matter to the Israeli-Syrian conflict) is not a
military one--neither in Jenin nor in Damascus.

