An Israeli air strike on an alleged Islamic Jihad site near Damascus was
launched on October 5, 2003 in retaliation for the devastating suicide
bombing in Haifa by a female member of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
This airstrike, the first inside Syria since the Yom Kippur War of
October 1973, apart from aiming at satisfying the desire for revenge
among Israelis, also carried a stern threat to Bashar of Damascus: stop
hosting these militant Palestinian groups--or you will be held
responsible and pay a high price!

If this is indeed Israel's new strategy, it may prove to be futile and
will possibly backfire if Hizballah or even Syria itself launches
missiles into Israel. But even if Damascus shuts down the bases of these
militant organizations--Hamas and Islamic Jihad--their violent
anti-Israel activities in the occupied territories and in Israel would
hardly be reduced; nor would the Israeli-Palestinian impasse be
resolved. Indeed, Damascus is likely to continue to do its utmost to
enhance this conflict as long as it serves its strategic interests.

Syria has a long record of using various Palestinian organizations in
the conflict with Israel, while also endeavoring to block or undermine
Palestinian attempts at rapprochement with Israel. Thus, before 1967,
the Ba'th regime in Damascus backed the Fatah organization and
permitted, even encouraged it to carry out subversive activities inside
Israel, including an attempt to sabotage the Jordan-Negev water project.
And after 1967, Syria periodically employed various Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) groups--partly from within its own borders, and
mostly via Lebanon--to attack civilian and military targets in Israel
and the occupied territories.

Ba'thist Syria and the PLO held similar ideological and strategic
concepts regarding the struggle against Israel, and for years Damascus
rendered military, logistic, and diplomatic support to the PLO. All
this--provided the PLO followed or adjusted to Syrian dictates. But
whenever the PLO's decisions and actions clashed with Syrian interests
or priorities, Damascus would take strong measures, including military
actions against the PLO. This was particularly the case in 1976 during
the Lebanese Civil War, when Syrian troops fought against disobedient
Palestinian fighters and subsequently did not prevent the Tal Za'atar
massacre of Palestinians by Maronites. And during the 1982 Israeli
invasion of Lebanon the Syrian army refrained from defending the
Palestinian infrastructure in southern Lebanon against the Israeli assault.

Significantly, following the Palestinian National Council recognition in
1988 of United Nations Resolutions 242
                                            and 181
                                            (the partition resolution of
1947), and in view of the PLO inclination to negotiate with Israel for
the first time, President Hafez al Asad vehemently attacked Palestinian
leader Yasir Arafat. Asad told Arafat that Palestinian independent
decision-making should terminate whenever it was incompatible with
Syrian national interests. Asad continued to harshly criticize Arafat
for not coordinating his moves with Damascus during the Madrid Peace
Conference of 1991 and particularly before signing the Oslo peace
accords                                             in 1993 with Israel.
Hinting that Arafat may pay with his own life for his misbehavior, Asad
continued to oppose the Oslo peace process while hosting the Hamas and
Islamic Jihad terrorist organizations, even during the Syrian-Israeli
Madrid peace process.

Following the collapse of that process in March 2000 and Asad's death
three months later in June, President Bashar al Asad has continued to
back the militant Palestinian organizations and has also supported the
al-Aqsa intifada that began in September of that same year. He alleged
that the solution of the Palestinian problem is more important than
settling the issue of the Golan Heights, and insisted that the
Palestinian "right-of-return" must be implemented, namely the return of
Palestinian refugees into Israel proper. On several occasions, including
a meeting with the Pope in Syria in May 2001, Bashar fiercely attacked
Israel and equated it to Nazi Germany.

To be sure, with such anti-Israel rhetoric and extreme positions on the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Bashar has contributed to inflaming this
as well as Syria's own conflict with Israel. Even though Bashar has
repeatedly said that peace with Israel continues to be Syria's
"strategic choice," his actual positions have alienated more and more
Israelis, as well as many Americans. Thus, not only are most Israelis
opposed to returning the Golan Heights to Syria, even for a peace
agreement, but Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's government may interpret
the Syria Accountability Act (SAA), approved by the US Congress on
October 15, 2003, as a yellow if not a green light to continue attacking
Palestinian terrorist sites inside Syria (the SAA threatens to impose
economic and diplomatic sanctions against Syria if Damascus continues to
harbor terrorist organizations, to develop weapons of mass destruction,
and to occupy Lebanon). Such attacks are likely to further imperil
relations between Israel and Syria and between Israel and the
Palestinians.

