The results of the recent Israeli elections are not good news, either
for the peace process or for the peace camps in both Israel and
Palestine. In the end, these elections have renewed the mandate of the
same Israeli leadership responsible for the ongoing violence, and
consequently the suffering of both Palestinians and Israelis. That is
because this leadership is deeply invested in the strategy of achieving
its objectives through force and violence, even while the experience of
the last two years has shown that violence can only reap violence, as
well as deepening hatred and a spirit of revenge.

It is notable, however, that the election results do not fully explain
the political tendencies present in the Israeli public today. A great
deal has been said about the confusing findings of polls that show that
the majority of the Israeli public supports a moderate political
program, including the creation of a Palestinian state and the
dismantling of settlements, at the same time that it has overwhelmingly
elected a political leadership that negates those very positions.

In fact, that might not be a contradiction, stemming instead from a
truth ignored by many analysts: the lack of a strong alternative to the
right-wing Likud on today's political map. The party presenting itself
as an alternative, i.e. the Labor Party, remains in the consciousness of
the Israeli public as part and parcel of the Likud-led coalition and in
fact responsible for whatever problems the Likud wrought. Indeed, the
Labor members were not merely partners in the coalition; they took the
lead roles of foreign minister and defense minister. One might say then,
that the Israeli public was either punishing or ignoring Labor for its
strategic error of joining the Likud-led coalition and allowing itself
to be merely a tool of the Likud right-wing platform.

Viewing these results, Palestinians are increasingly pessimistic and
preparing themselves for a continuation of what they have experienced
thus far. In a last-ditch attempt to unmask the real face of returning
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon--who tried during the campaign to show that
he can be both a man of war and man of peace--the Palestinian leadership
renewed its commitment to the peace process and willingness to resume
negotiations with any government on the basis of signed agreements and
other peace process terms of reference, including the various Security
Council resolutions calling for a complete end to the occupation in
exchange for a comprehensive peace.

But Sharon's response was quick and consistent with what we know of the
pre-election Sharon. In order to ensure continuity, not only in politics
but also in practice, the occupying Israeli army killed on Election Day
no less than nine Palestinians, four of them children under the age of
14. The day before the elections, seven Palestinians were killed and the
day before that, 12 were killed in the now infamous raid on Gaza.

It is no coincidence then, that on the eve of Israeli elections, 12
Palestinian factions ended a second round of dialogue in Cairo failing
to agree on a unilateral comprehensive ceasefire. Significantly, they
did succeed in reaching consensus on their willingness to embark on a
bilateral ceasefire with Israel and/or an Israeli-Palestinian agreement
to avoid attacking civilians on both sides. Palestinians, therefore,
have extended a hand, but the success of these talks depends on the
ability of Egypt and others sponsoring the dialogue to convince Israel
to reciprocate in a mutual ceasefire. Otherwise, the coming phase of
this conflict is going to be simply but tragically a continuation of
what we have seen before.

