Despite predictions that Ariel Sharon would win the Israeli elections,
his sweeping victory has resonated loudly in various Palestinian
sectors. Certainly, there is a compelling need to understand the
relationship between this cause and effect: why did Sharon win the
elections and what forces are driving the Israeli electorate?

The percentage of Israeli human losses as compared to Palestinian losses
were at their highest under the Sharon regime. The ratio of Israeli to
Palestinian deaths has narrowed considerably under Sharon to one Israeli
death for every three Palestinian dead, while under his predecessor Ehud
Barak, the ratio was one to ten, and under Benjamin Netanyahu the ratio
was one to fifteen. Understanding Sharon's success despite this
phenomenon is compelling.

There are two Palestinian schools of thought that attempt to explain the
current rise of Sharonism. The first school suggests that the
militarization of the intifada is the central cause for Sharon's
landslide return to head the Israeli government. By this reasoning, the
heightened Palestinian resistance has only caused tremendous damage to
Palestinians themselves by extracting painful Israeli military reactions
and by pushing many Israelis to extremism.

Accordingly, members of this school of thought have expended great
efforts to limit the resistance so that it does not include Israeli
civilians. They have also signaled the possibility of offering the
Sharon government a year or several months of calm. These individuals
advocate pulling the rug out from Sharon's feet and not giving him cause
to do more damage to Palestinian society.

From the beginning, this school of thought saw the intifada as posing a
serious threat to its platform and negotiating programs. As such, its
advocates have worked tirelessly to keep matters under their control and
to utilize the Palestinian intifada only as an instrument for restarting
talks. They see the continuation of resistance as a worrisome and
dangerous matter. Indeed, inside this school, there are voices saying
that even if Sharon intensifies his barbaric attacks, Palestinians must
remain idle and win the battle through their blood. These thinkers
believe that Palestinians must rescue what is rescuable at this stage.

There is, of course, an opposing school of thought with different
analyses and solutions. This school of thought has sat by and watched
the slow nature of the peace process for many years and has come,
therefore, to see the intifada and its resistance as a process of
national liberation, rather than an instrument for restarting the
political process. These individuals see the intifada as a process of
expunging the occupation and arriving finally at independence. They see
the static regional context as having actually become a pillar of
support for the occupation in Israel's unjust war. This school also
blames the Israeli left for "beautifying" Israeli occupation, and
accuses it of creating the atmosphere necessary for the collapse of the
political process and the entry of Sharon.

This school does not blame the resistance for Sharon's success, despite
that he has smashed the rule that Israeli leaders measure success in
their ability to provide security for the Israeli people. Rather, it
believes that there are other underlying causes for the current
environment, most important of which is the absence of the Israeli left
over the last two and a half years.

There are two very critical strategic dangers for Palestinian society in
the foreseeable future. The foremost danger is the threat that Sharon
poses to the symbol of Palestinian nationalism, i.e., President Yasser
Arafat. Sharon has made no secret of his hatred for the Palestinian
leader. Unless the symbol of nationalism is defended and protected by
Palestinians themselves, he could be in imminent danger.

The second critical danger is Sharon's determined effort to crush the
Palestinian intifada, which means more assassinations, incarcerations,
starvation and occupation of the Palestinian people. The strategic
danger here lies in the fact that if pushed to its logical conclusions,
this state of affairs might in the end sway some Palestinians to opt for
a negotiated process in the absence of the intifada (i.e., the first
school of thought would force through a meaningless political process).

It is my view that, whether Sharon forms a national unity government or
an exclusively rightist government, the content of this next chapter in
his political life (likely his last) will not differ dramatically.
Sharon is determined to administer the conflict with the Palestinians by
relying first and foremost on his military machine and not on
negotiations. Irrespective of his coalition partners, Sharon has
obtained for his party one third of the seats in the Israeli Knesset and
it is quite natural, then, for him to feel victorious and press ahead.

The best protection against this danger is to protect the scope of
resistance, while arming it with a clear-cut political program that all
Israelis, leftists and rightists, are made aware of. Every Israeli must
understand that the Palestinian goal is to end the occupation and that
the security of every Israeli is inexorably linked to the security of
every Palestinian.

It is impossible to overemphasize the extent of the calamity upon us.
Unless this situation is dealt with in creative ways, then we may find
that we have returned to being the hostages of Israeli rightist
positions--not for years to come, but for perhaps decades. The only way
to escape is if a balance is maintained between the intifada and
diplomacy. It is said that diplomacy without power is like music without
instruments. Neither should come at the expense of the other.
Palestinian society is well accustomed to internal debate, but the
sooner we can arrive at this balance, the better. I believe that
eventually, that recognition will come--the question is whether it will
come too late.

