The roadmap document proposed by the United States government is the
major initiative being discussed in Middle East diplomacy. While it
would be easy to come up with a much more dramatic and bold process
towards peace, this plan does distinguish itself in that it defines its
ultimate goal as ending the Israeli occupation and establishing an
independent and viable Palestinian state. Given that, I explore here
more incremental ways of transforming this roadmap to make it a viable
peace plan.

Maintaining the principle of reciprocity and parallel compromise is the
most obvious first step towards peace. The roadmap to date contains too
many incremental steps that rely on each other before the implementation
of significant compromise on the part of Israel. In a workable document,
each stage should lead to the betterment of the living and economic
conditions of both peoples, thus emphasizing a cooperative spirit, not
one based on force or domination.

It is not satisfactory to define the role of Palestinians as "ending
violence and terrorism" and the role of Israel as "doing what is
necessary for a democratic Palestinian state to be established." These
unbalanced assertions place the onus of the responsibility on
Palestinians (as if they were occupying Israel) and preempt the rest of
the roadmap with the idea that Israel can get by with resting on its
laurels.

Both parties must embark on the roadmap process (Stage One) by agreeing
to stop the use of violence, end the Israeli occupation in Areas A and B
(areas designated by previous peace agreements) and stop all Israeli
measures that impede the freedom of movement and ordinary lives of
Palestinians. Both parties should refrain from any activities that will
prejudice the final conclusion of talks, including Israeli settlement
activities. The goals at this stage include improving Palestinian
economic conditions and allowing the continuation of the Palestinian
reform plan.

In order to put the roadmap in an internationally legal framework less
subservient to the regional imbalance of power, there should be an
international conference held to gain world momentum and the United
Nations Security Council should issue a resolution adopting the roadmap
peace plan.

Both leaderships should issue statements renouncing violence and
committing seriously to preventing violence and pursuing this peace
plan. The Palestinian leadership will renew its recognition of the state
of Israel, which in turn will affirm its recognition of the Palestinian
people's right to self-determination and establish an independent
sovereignty state. In addition, and further giving this roadmap a legal
backbone, each party will separately express its commitment to abide by
international humanitarian law.

With international humanitarian law and legal precepts governing
expectations for both armed Palestinian activists and the security
branches of the Palestinian Authority, it is much easier politically to
"reconstruct the Palestinian security apparatuses under the supervision
and assistance from the Quartet Committee and return to the commitment
to the signed agreements, including a halt to all kinds of military
activities outside the law and a total halt to violence."

In addition, this formula demands no less of Israel than of Palestinians.

Here, the Quartet Committee should work out a detailed plan for
simultaneous operations to end the Israeli security presence in the
Palestinian Authority areas and Israeli restrictions on Palestinian
movement (which also hinder the movement of the security forces), and
allow Palestinian security to re-shoulder security responsibility in
those areas. This mechanism should facilitate both the ending of
Palestinian violence and Israeli military attacks, including
assassinations, arrests and home demolitions.

There is currently an overwhelming Palestinian consensus that
negotiations of substance should not be held as long as Israel is
proceeding with unilateral steps that prejudice the outcome of those
talks. Israel must at this point undertake the necessary steps for a
total settlement freeze, to be monitored by the Quartet or another party
commissioned by the Quartet.

This step and the implementation of an economic revitalization package
for Palestinians will perform as public incentive for support of the
roadmap. No diplomatic initiative can take hold as long as Palestinian
unemployment remains at 60 percent.

The original roadmap contains numerous line items detailing the process
of Palestinian reform, including the appointment of a prime minister,
elections, the writing of a constitution--all of which are to take place
before any substantial movement by Israel. In Palestinian eyes, this
micromanagement is both insulting and sets up numerous obstacles to the
roadmap as a whole. Each line item can be defined by Israel in such a
way as to allow it to stall on its own commitments.

That is not to say that Palestinians could not benefit from technical
support, expertise and monetary backing to develop our systems of
government and legislation. However, all of this can happen through the
support, development and continuation of efforts assisted by the
International Task Force, and be undertaken by the various Palestinian
departments, ministries and private sector companies.

While the roadmap does stipulate the reopening of Palestinian Jerusalem
institutions closed by Israel, it makes no mention of the thousands of
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. As in any conflict, good faith
and recognition that this conflict is coming to an end would require a
gradual prisoner release. The vast numbers of prisoners is often
overlooked as a source of antagonism between the two sides and their
release would do much to ease the transition away from conflict to peace.

As the last step in the first stage of the roadmap, Palestinian
elections should be conducted under international supervision.
Immediately afterwards, the second stage should commence with another
international conference to renew the parties' commitments. All efforts
to reinforce calm should continue through the empowerment of Palestinian
security and improvement of Palestinian living conditions.

In the last stage, "Palestinians and Israelis will commence negotiations
launched at the international conference and sponsored by the Quartet
Committee, crafting a permanent and comprehensive final status agreement
ending the Palestinian-Israeli conflict in 2005 through an agreed upon
and negotiated settlement between the parties based on Security Council
resolutions: 242, 338, 1397, and 194 and the end of the occupation that
started in 1967. The refugee issue will be solved in a just and final
manner on the basis of Resolution 194, and the issue of Jerusalem will
be solved in a manner that considers international legitimacy, the
political and religious concerns of the parties and the religious
interests of Jews, Christians and Muslims in the world."

