Q: What did you see in your recent trip to Iraq that evoked
for you similarities or differences with Palestine?

A: We were traveling between Baghdad and al Halla and we had to
find a bypass road to avoid an area that had been closed by the
Americans. We were stuck for more than one hour, and I thought--I even
wrote it down--that I didn't see any difference between what was
happening here and in Palestine.

This put me in the psychological situation of being at home. At times I
was frightened, not because the Americans were there, but because I was
thinking that they were Israeli soldiers--that impression was living
inside of me.

There were checkpoints and bypass roads and requests for IDs. But here
in Palestine, [the Israelis] are more hi-tech. When you get to a
checkpoint, they easily record your ID number and check the computer to
see if you are wanted. In Baghdad, the Americans don't have such things.
They are a new occupation.

Another issue that reminded me of home was the cement walls.

Q: The army is building walls?

A: The walls are closing roads, cutting off entrances to
military camps and hotels and ministries, or the way to the airport from
Baghdad. Of course, these are not dividing the country, but it does make
life difficult.

Q: From a political standpoint, what are the comparisons
that can be made?

A: I heard from Iraqi intellectuals about how the Iraqi and
Palestinian authorities are similar, in that they are called
"authorities", but are not responsible for more than education and
health. This was a joke they told.

But in truth, the political situations are entirely different. There, we
are speaking about "occupation"--even those in the Iraqi council call it
an occupation. But there are still some Iraqis who believe that the
American occupation is necessary in order to manage the internal divisions.

Al Iraqiya television, one of the TV stations founded by the Americans
and an official Iraqi channel, speaks of Palestine as an "occupation",
but when it talks about Iraq, it talks about the "coalition forces."
These people also do not find the two cases similar. They see the
Palestinians as having the right to rebel against the Israeli
occupation, and the Iraqi resistance as illegitimate.

Q: When you spoke with Iraqis about how they see their
future, what did they say? Do they sound like Palestinians?

A: We were there supporting the Iraqi implementation of a large
survey about living conditions. We traveled all over Kirkuk, Halqut and
Yacouba. The Iraqis say they are unsure about their future. At the
beginning of the war, they had a lot of hope, but now they are not sure
how things will be.

My Iraqi friends said that those of us living in Palestine and Iraq are
going to compete with each other for quite a long time over whose
situation is worse. But even as they make this comparison, most of them
believe that the Iraqi problem will be solved more easily than the
Palestinian problem.

Q: In your experience, how do Palestinians view Iraq?

A: A lot of Palestinians make the comparison in the sense that
when they watch television, it is hard for them to distinguish
[visually] between Iraq and Palestine. But the context is very
different. Here in Palestine, we are speaking about daily conflict, not
only with Israeli soldiers, but with the Israeli people in the form of
settlers, the bypass roads, the fence.

I believe that the Iraqi problem is easily solved, when compared with
Palestine. Here, on the other hand, we are speaking about another people
that want to replace us, not only occupy us. They want our land. There,
it is more economic and another kind of political agenda, for which
there might be an agreement that you can be happy with. But for
Palestinians, any new agreement is difficult--even [Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel] Sharon's proposal was rejected by the Likud. Our issue
is much more complicated.

