Q: You are in Rafah. What do you think will happen there in
2005?

A: Rafah has been living in extraordinarily difficult
circumstances in the last four years. All of Rafah, whether houses,
agriculture, trees, land, has been destroyed by the Israeli occupation.
I think... I hope, that 2005 will give us an opportunity to live. We
need to rebuild Rafah. We need 2,500 new houses, we need to replant
trees and re-cultivate the land that has been leveled. Everything needs
to be rebuilt in Rafah, from the infrastructure to the social and
economic life. I think this year will provide us some hope for life in
Rafah and the future, actually, some hope that we may arrive at the
beginning of peace.

Q: What makes you so hopeful?

A: My hope springs from the fact that we begin the year with
elections, and all Palestinians will share in electing a new president.
This gives me hope. This is the beginning of the way forward for all
Palestinians.

Q: How does the Israeli withdrawal plan from Gaza fit into
this? Will it happen and if it does, is it a good thing?

A: I think the Israeli occupation will end in Gaza. This is
what they've said, and I think the unity government with Sharon and
Peres is meant to ensure that this withdrawal happens?

Q: But is a unilateral withdrawal good for you?

A: I hope that there will be agreement between the PA and
Israel. But even if not, the PA will still be able to control everything
in the Strip. The authority is ready and able to take control. I think
the first thing Abu Mazen will do if he is elected president is to
initiate talks with all the Palestinian factions, especially Hamas and
Islamic Jihad, to this end.

Q: And will these talks be successful?

A: I think the talks will succeed. I think Palestinians are
eager for the factions to work together and for us to show the world
that we can take control of our own affairs.

Q: Last year was a difficult year for Fateh. How do you see
the year ahead for the movement?

A: 2005 should see elections in Fateh, in addition to the
elections in the municipalities and for the Legislative Council. All of
these are important to rebuild our social and economic lives, to plan
for the future. In Fateh it is important to hold elections, sooner
rather than later, to also establish the program for the future.

It is important for Fateh, like it is in all the factions, for the young
generation to start assuming positions of leadership. That is the best
way to prepare for the future, and that is what the Fateh conference
should provide us.

