If we examine the past year's events in Iraq as one important dimension
of the United States' post-9/11 strategy in the Middle East, it seems
clear that, on balance, Israel has benefited. But this might not
continue for long to be the case.

True, the US occupation of Iraq did not bring about the much ballyhooed
positive domino effect of peace and democratization in the region. Yet
on balance, and to date, America's actions in the region over the past
two and a half years have been good for Israel. They have eliminated any
vestige of a coordinated Arab military threat ("eastern front") against
Israel, begun to roll back the weapons of mass destruction threat
(Libya, hopefully Iran, Pakistan's proliferation mania), and provided
Israel with a powerful ally in its struggle against the Islamic radical
movements that target it.

After 9/11 Israel joined the "good guys", while Yasser Arafat maneuvered
himself into the ranks of the "evil ones", along with Saddam Hussein.
Even the uglier aspects of the American war on terror-regrettable
civilian casualties and damage in Iraq, the daunting specter of the
Guantanamo detention facility, and the recent revelations regarding
American and British torture of prisoners-reflect favorably on Israel,
by demonstrating to its critics in the West that its treatment of
Palestinians in wartime, however problematic, is probably more humane
than the "dirty war" norms of what other civilized countries end up
doing as they fight back against terrorism.

At the grand strategic level, the American offensives in Afghanistan and
Iraq and against al Qaeda are predicated on a notion that is very
welcome in Israel: that the real Middle East dynamic around which US
policy should be organized is not the Israel-Arab or Israeli-Palestinian
dispute, but rather the need to counter Islamic terror, WMD, and radical
rogue states, all of which directly threaten American security.

Those who now argue that "Iraq = Palestine", that in both countries Arab
freedom fighters are struggling against imperialists and colonialists,
hold that, in effect, there are no Middle East solutions-no peace, no
democracy and human rights, no prosperity, no stability-without a
Palestinian solution. That is what moderate Arab countries like Egypt
and Jordan told the Bush administration before the invasion of Iraq.

In is now clear that US President Bush barely paid lip service to this
notion. He adopted the roadmap prior to the war to help out British
Prime Minister Tony Blair politically, and made a mild effort to
"launch" it shortly after the occupation of Iraq was completed. But the
administration's heart was never really in this enterprise. It assessed,
with some degree of accuracy, that the moderate Arab states with their
concern over Palestine were nothing but "paper tigers" in the Iraqi
context. What became important for Washington was installing a stable
and friendly regime in Baghdad and, as a consequence, winning the
November 2004 election.

In this regard, the noble goal of democratization in the Middle East has
emerged during the past year as nothing but old-fashioned regime change.
Ask Yasser Arafat, whose removal Washington and Jerusalem adamantly
demand because he condones terrorism, even though he was elected more
democratically than any other Middle East leader. Further, Bush signaled
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon just under a year ago that American
electoral and Iraqi concerns require that there be no messy
Israeli-Palestinian peace process at all. Bush went out on a limb to
embrace Sharon's problematic disengagement plan only on condition that
it not take place in 2004 and that the preparations provide Washington
with "peace" dividends in return for minimal investment; now even that
deal has been jeopardized by the negative Likud referendum vote.

Despite Israel's improved strategic status, not all of the post-9/11
related developments are good for its long term interests. A vigorous
US-sponsored Israeli-Palestinian peace process would certainly be better
than the administration's indifference. Meanwhile, even though Iraq
really is not Palestine, the veneer is wearing thin on the American
grand strategy in the region, and that is definitely bad for Israel.
Indeed, the more the American armed forces sink into a violent morass in
Iraq and possibly in Afghanistan, lose their deterrent effect and fail
to stabilize a single Arab country into which Washington has invested
nearly 150,000 troops and hundreds of billions of dollars, the worse it
is not only for the United States, but for its ally, Israel, as well.

If the US now opts to extricate itself from Iraq by adopting more
traditional Middle East expedients-Israel may pay a price. In
retrospect, the red line may have been crossed with the enthusiastic
introduction and endorsement by Washington of a UN special envoy for
Iraq, Algeria's Lakhdar Brahimi, for whom Israel is "the big poison" in
the Middle East (talk about linkage!), followed by a plan to promote a
compromise caretaker commander for Fallujah drawn from the ranks of
Saddam's most trusted generals. 

