Since the outbreak of the war in Iraq, a constant feature of the
political debate in the Middle East and beyond has been the argument
that the conflicts in Iraq and in Palestine are essentially similar,
that they are closely linked together, influence one another and are but
one struggle fought on two fronts.

The claim that Iraq and Palestine are interlinked was invoked in the
past by Iraqis seeking to capitalize on the Arab commitment to Palestine
in advancing Iraqi interests. One recalls Saddam Hussein's attempt in
1990 to mobilize Arab popular support for his plans for Kuwait, claiming
that Iraq's struggle for Kuwait was part of the Arab struggle to
liberate Palestine, and receiving an enthusiastic ovation from Yasser
Arafat. Later on Saddam bought Iraq's shares in the Palestinian struggle
by subsidizing families of suicide bombers. Nowadays Muqtada al-Sadr is
the most outspoken Iraqi figure endorsing Hamas (as well as Hizbullah).

Stories about American-Israeli cooperation in counterinsurgency,
including guided tours presumably conducted by Israeli officers for
their American opposite numbers in the Jenin refugee camp, are quoted by
proponents of the linkage argument. Analysts offer a variety of ways by
which the two conflicts influence each other or are expected to do so.

Thus it is suggested that as the insurgency in Iraq gains momentum, it
will uplift the morale of its Palestinian counterpart and instill in it
increased drive and initiative, and the revived Palestine armed struggle
will in turn bolster the resolve of the Iraqi insurgency. Moreover, the
linkage between the two conflicts is said to have already enhanced the
centrality of the Palestine problem: America's difficulties in Iraq, as
well as the growing hostility it faces from Arabs and Muslims, are bound
to force it to change its attitude and start exerting pressures on Israel.

A parallelism has even been found between the people of the besieged
Fallujah in Iraq and the Egyptian soldiers trapped in Fallujah and in
Iraq al-Manshiyyah in Palestine during the 1948 War, an experience which
provided one of them, Gamal Abd al-Nasser, with inspiration for his
pan-Arab vision. The view that the two conflicts are linked, and that
one cannot be solved without the other, is voiced by realistic and
pragmatic political figures and commentators.

Yet the two conflicts are not really interlinked. Their respective
sources and trajectories are profoundly different. In Iraq the violence
is obviously a manifestation of an inter- and intra-communal struggle
for power in preparation for the departure of the coalition forces, and
fighting against those forces is one of the cards used by competing
parties. The conflict in Iraq did not break out as a result of
developments in Palestine, and its resolution does not depend on
resolving the Palestinian problem. Similarly, were the main parties in
Iraq to agree on a formula opening the way for internal peace and
departure of coalition forces, would this change the basic positions of
Israelis and Palestinians in their conflict, or the balance of power, or
the situation on the ground?

Furthermore, the two conflicts clearly evolve independently of each
other. Jenin has indeed declared itself a twin city with Fallujah (the
one in Iraq), yet the siege of Fallujah, and the intensification of the
insurgency in Iraq in general, have not been accompanied by a similar
intensification of Palestinian operations, at least thus far. Similarly,
America's difficulties in Iraq have not forced it to change its policies
vis-a-vis Israel, again at least thus far-witness the recent Bush-Sharon
understandings.

Events in Iraq since March 2003 have only underlined what had been
obvious for some time, namely that in real political terms, pan-Arabism
exists no longer, and inter-Arab commitment is symbolic rather than
real. The struggle of the Palestinians is their own, and its fate will
be determined by whatever happens on the ground, and not far afield.

Still, Iraq does have implications for the Arab-Israel equation in a
wider sense. One is the removal of the potential eastern front threat,
following the demise of the Saddam regime. It is difficult to imagine
the reemergence of an Iraqi military threat to Israel in the next few
years. In hindsight it can be argued that the Iraqi military did not
constitute a formidable threat in the first place. Nevertheless it had
such an image, and its removal allows the introduction of changes in
Israel's strategic and political planning.

Secondly, the continued military presence of the United States in Iraq,
and its inability thus far to lead the local forces to form a
legitimate, effective and stable government, seem to erode its image as
the one power capable of setting the Middle Eastern agenda. The longer
it stays in Iraq, the harder it will be for the US to revive and lead
the Israeli-Palestinian peace process. This serves the interests of
neither Palestinians nor Israelis.

