The Oslo Declaration of Principles (DOP) was signed more than eight
years ago. About three years ago a bilateral Israeli-Palestinian
permanent agreement was supposed to take effect. We are as far away from
such an agreement today as we were nearly six years ago, in
February-March 1996, when the process came to a halt following a wave of
terrorist attacks. All attempts made since then to get negotiations back
on track and renew the Oslo process have collapsed. Six years appear to
constitute a sufficient period of time to recognize that we have failed
and to search for alternative approaches.

The first suitable step is soul searching: what was accomplished and
what was not accomplished through the Oslo process?

On the positive side, the Oslo DOP was revolutionary. After more than 70
years of zero sum confrontation between the two sides, the two national
movements, Zionist and Palestinian, recognized and accepted one
another's right to exist as an independent national unit. The
Palestinian national leadership established itself among its people,
within the borders of the future Palestinian state. From Israel's
standpoint, the government ceased bearing political and administrative
responsibility for the fate of three million Palestinian residents of
the West Bank and Gaza Strip, thus bringing to an end 30 years of
imposed military rule.

On the negative side, the drafters of the agreement made one huge
mistake; they tried to put the cart before the horse. The DOP ushered in
a process of territorial transfers that pinned hopes on confidence
building measures by both sides; these in turn were intended to prepare
public opinion prior to initiating final status negotiations. Herein
lies the catch: it quickly (and predictably) became evident that a
reverse process had commenced. Both sides began feverishly creating new
and negative facts on the ground that would enable them to improve
positions in anticipation of the final dispensation of each final status
issue.

The Al-Aqsa Intifada began 14 months ago. Throughout this time we have
witnessed repeated mediation attempts intended to bring about a
ceasefire and to facilitate renewal of negotiations. By any standard, 14
months are enough time to conclude that there is no chance for such an
initiative to succeed. On the contrary, the violent, persistent and
painful struggle has gradually hardened public opinion, to the point
where both sides are less and less ready to end the violence without
knowing in advance what the political payoff is.

Historical experience teaches us that in nearly all armed conflicts it
is not the ceasefire that precedes negotiations but, to the contrary, it
is political negotiations and the agreement they produce that facilitate
and generate a ceasefire. Indeed, both sides in such a violent conflict
take into account that negotiations and a political agreement will
clearly express the balance of forces in their armed conflict.

Isn't it time we learned from the experience of others? Does it still
make sense to adhere stubbornly to a failed process and repeatedly renew
a sterile effort focused entirely on achieving a ceasefire prior to
negotiating? It would be better for all three parties--Israel, the
Palestinians and the US--to abandon the Tenet and Mitchell plans once
and for all, and to open negotiations even as the violence and armed
struggle continue on both sides. Renewing negotiations under these
conditions will create a new situation: at a stroke the ground will be
pulled out from under those terrorists who enjoy the capacity to torpedo
negotiations at any moment by carrying out acts that destroy the "quiet"
demanded as a precondition for negotiating.

Such an approach is based not only on practical logic. It also
constitutes pressure on both parties to accelerate the negotiating
process, in the clear knowledge that if they don't reach agreement and
understanding, then the current impasse will necessarily be solved by
decisive military action between them.

