Q: How would you describe the changes happening right now in
Jerusalem and plans for more "separation" in the future? [Ed.'s note:
Israeli officials approved this week a plan to tighten security and
checkpoints along a "seam" between the West Bank and Jerusalem. Plans
for a wall were not approved.]

A: These measures, simply, are the tightening of the isolation
of Jerusalem from the rest of the Palestinian occupied territories. What
is new in this case is that [Israeli authorities] are isolating, not
only Jerusalem within the municipal borders, but also the Arab
neighborhoods around the city. We are worried that these measures that
they are taking now--they claim that they are being taken for security
reasons--will be exploited for political purposes. There are areas that
are Area B, over which the Palestinian Authority has full civilian
control, that are being annexed within this belt. In the future, we are
worried that Israel will try to change the status of these areas.

Q: How does this "separation" affect Palestinians on the ground?

A: The life of East Jerusalem depends on the areas and villages
around it. People go to Jerusalem to buy and sell, to see a doctor--and
for all kinds of services. Even before the recent measures, these Arabs
were not allowed to go to Jerusalem, so this affected both sides. It
affected the life inside Jerusalem, mainly economic, in that Jerusalem
residents were suffocating under this pressure. And it affected these
people outside because they could not get to Jerusalem. The effect is
not only economic, but cultural, as well. People cannot go to schools or
to social events or the schools and universities. People cannot get to
the church and to the mosque.

There is another dimension that people rarely speak about and that is
terror. I mean that when Palestinians are not allowed to go to
Jerusalem, but they must go for the reasons I listed above, they are
always afraid that the police will see them and arrest them. Anyone who
penetrates Jerusalem through the bypass roads or dirt roads is always
afraid that the police will stop him in the street, ask him for his ID
and, when they discover that he is Palestinian, arrest him.

In my opinion, this is not worse than an Israeli walking in the street
in fear that a bomb will explode. In the end, when you don't feel
secure, you are terrorized. This terror is made by a state, by Israel,
and therefore it is easy to ask that state to stop this terror and allow
people to live normally.

Q: But Israelis say that this is necessary to maintain their
security.

A: It has been proven very clearly that these measures cannot
protect Israelis. Attacks take place in spite of all the closures and
the checkpoints. It is time for Israelis to understand that their peace
and security will only be achieved by making peace with Palestinians.
That peace cannot be achieved without negotiating an agreement, so that
each side has the chance to live in peace and dignity in their own state.

Q: How does what you see around you reflect the Israeli
negotiation plan?

A: I am not sure. [Former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud] Barak
proposed that all of the settlements around Jerusalem be annexed to
Jerusalem and that the Arab neighborhoods would be under Palestinian
sovereignty. Now the villages are inside this belt, so there is a
withdrawal from what was suggested and an attempt to create de facto a
totally different situation.

In discussing these things, it is always important to define the borders
of Jerusalem and whether we are talking about the city within its
municipal borders or Greater Jerusalem [i.e., Israeli annexation and
expansion of the Jerusalem boundaries since the occupation of the West
Bank]. Israel is further attempting to affect the political balance of
the city by expelling as many Palestinians as possible from Jerusalem
under the cover of [rescinding] blue identity cards, which is actually a
permanent residence card.

Q: How would you respond to Israeli attempts to further
create unilateral separation--with a wall around the West Bank and
perhaps even the evacuation of some settlements? Could this be at all
positive for Palestinians?

A: The Israelis did not discuss this plan with us, what we have
is what is in the media. In principle, any unilateral act is not
acceptable to us. We are totally against it because we believe that this
is an attempt to create facts on the ground.

We have no choice but to stick to the land. We hope that meanwhile there
will be a return to political negotiations. The Palestinian Authority is
in contact with our friends in the United States and Europe to urge them
to practice pressure to stop this harassment and stop the changing of
facts on the ground in general and in Jerusalem, specifically.

