We now sit at a crossroads after two years of Intifada. Palestinians and
Israelis are further apart than ever and each side (especially the
Israeli side) is now making decisions that will affect the region for
generations to come. It is no surprise then that both parties, in the
same week, have experienced government upheaval.

Strikingly, and even though President Yasser Arafat seemed in more
trouble than Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, Arafat has come out in pretty
good shape. One might even ask if what his people tried to explain seven
weeks ago as a "setback" was not really just one more tactic by this
political magician. It certainly appears that Arafat himself felt that
interior minister Abdel Rizaq Al Yehiya was making some decisions
without consulting him, and therefore used the chance to remove him.

Otherwise it is difficult to understand why Arafat's choice of cabinet
would have failed a vote of confidence seven weeks ago, but sail through
one today. The changes made in the cabinet selection were not so
significant. The only important change was the entrance of Hani Al Hasan
who is an influential Fateh Central Committee Member. Al Hasan is from
the German link of Fateh, has good ties to the Gulf States and was the
first Palestinian ambassador to Iran. There is no doubt that he is
politically stronger than Al Yahiya.

The only other major shift in the cabinet was the departure of Jamil
Tarifi as minister of civil affairs (despite that Tarifi will maintain
his powers as head of a "bureau"). But despite the lack of real cabinet
reform, the Legislative Council vote, 56 for the cabinet and 18 against,
shows that Arafat still completely controls Fateh, the main political
force on the ground. After all the external effort to weaken the
Palestinian leader, this is truly amazing.

Heading his own new government, Sharon is likely to continue his
attempts to undermine Arafat. With a right-wing majority, it will be
easier to implement his three-pronged policy towards Palestinians: to
destroy what remains of the Authority, to continue to impede the peace
process and the "roadmap," and (under the guise of the first two)
quietly continue the policy of colonizing Palestinian land. With this
extremist cabinet, Sharon will find it easier to implement the final
step in his third objective, which is the transfer of Palestinians from
the land. (It should be said, however, that attempts of this nature will
face a great number of problems, not least of which is Palestinians' own
memory of the ethnic cleansing of 1948.)

Initially, we can expect Sharon to repeat his performance of the spring
of 2001 when he exerted efforts to show that he is a statesman, not an
extremist. Eventually, however, he will show his true colors. One of the
things that is so remarkable about the Israeli government today is its
lack of internal checks. Palestinians can expect an even more difficult
situation on the ground, as it seems likely that settlers will be used
as a paramilitary arm with which to attack Palestinians. There is, of
course, the possibility that the introduction of settlers as a tool in
the violent conflict will lead to its eventual internationalization.

The swearing-in of former Chief of Staff Shaul Mofaz as minister of
defense in the new Sharon cabinet raises the specter of further
militarization of Israeli society, and the politicization of the army.
Mofaz was one of the first ever chiefs of staff to speak so extensively
to the media. He publicly opposed the army's departure from Hebron, for
example, and argued in at least one cabinet meeting that Sharon must
exploit the opportunity at hand and drive Arafat out of Palestine for good.

This cabinet, while unprecedented in its right-wing credentials, is also
a mile marker in the history of Zionism. When Zionist leaders first
discussed creating a state, they thought of creating a modern liberal
state "of Jews." Theodore Herzl chose this wording deliberately,
rejecting the religious characteristics of "a Jewish state." Today,
however, we are seeing a new phenomenon, which is that the main
characteristic of the state of Israel is that of religion. In the short
term, this dramatic strategic shift will pose great difficulties and
dangers for Palestinians. In the long term, however, it will be Israel
that will pay the price.

