The timing chosen by Labor Party leader Fuad Ben Eliezer for last week's
coalition crisis was dictated solely by his personal political
difficulties. As his primaries test against Haim Ramon and Amram Mitzna
approaches on November 19, he is behind in the polls; he calculated that
three weeks of presenting himself as leader of a fighting opposition
might yet convince Labor voters to back him.

That's politics; Israeli governments have frequently fallen over
seemingly peripheral causes. But the political flurry of the coalition
collapse and Prime Minister Sharon's maneuvering between a narrow
coalition and early elections cannot obfuscate the real issue. It was
merely highlighted by Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat's success last
week in gaining Legislative Council approval for a new-old cabinet that
offered little hope for real change in Palestine. While Israelis were
getting ready for an exercise in real democracy and Palestinians
remained mired in Arafat's autocracy, neither side has effective
leadership that can point the way toward peace. Nor does the United States.

Against this very negative backdrop, the internal political events of
last week in Israel and Palestine offer Israelis a blessing, a danger
and a hope.

The blessing is the emergence of a genuine political opposition against
the settlement and war policies of Ariel Sharon. Until now Meretz failed
to provide such an opposition, both because of its small numbers (10
representatives in the Knesset) and because it did not enunciate a
realistic alternative policy, concentrating instead on options that
failed to appeal to skeptical Israelis, like renewed negotiations with
Arafat and introduction of an international force. Hopefully now, and
particularly after November 19, Labor will concentrate on the most
urgent issue for Israel: the need to stop the South Africanization of
the conflict at any cost--first and foremost, through unilateral
redeployment, the favored option of both Ramon and Mitzna.

The danger is that Sharon, who is determined to maintain manipulative
control over 3.5 million Palestinians whatever the cost to Israel, will
form a narrow right wing government that will increase the spread of
settlements and the concomitant heavy-handed, dead-end oppression of the
Palestinian civilian population. This will reflect the critical and
extremely dangerous grip that the settler minority has gained over
Israeli politics. In this sense, Ben Eliezer was right on the mark when
he focused on the settlements' ample budgetary allotments in bringing
down the government; a smarter politician and stronger leader could have
scored more points on this issue.

Sharon could allow himself to turn down Ben Eliezer's modest request to
reduce settlement budgets, and may allow himself to go the path of a
narrow government, in the confidence that he will not face significant
pressures from Washington. The Bush administration has placed the
settlement issue somewhere in the middle of its "non-urgent things to do
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict" list, and is generally indifferent
to what happens there as long as the lid doesn't blow off. That is also
why Yasir Arafat could afford to present his Legislative Council with
another non-reform cabinet that includes two ministers from a pro-Iraqi
movement and no prime minister, and whose new interior minister, Hani
al-Hassan, thinks he can contribute to a solution by declaring that
settler women and children are fair game for Palestinian terrorists
("they cannot be considered civilians", Haaretz, 29.10.2002).

The election of Ariel Sharon and the formation of a unity government
almost two years ago were Israel's knee-jerk reaction to Arafat's
implicit rejection of Israel's existence as a Jewish state. But now both
the Jewish and the democratic nature of that state are in danger from
within--from the settlements.

This brings us to the hope. In a reality where neither Sharon nor Arafat
nor Bush has a realistic strategy for peace, a rejuvenated Labor Party
might make a difference. The November 19 primaries for party leader are
in many ways a more important and deserving focus of our attention than
Sharon's decision whether to opt for elections in February or May of
next year. If Labor can elect a leader who focuses like a laser on the
dangers to a democratic and Jewish Israel presented by the
settlements--ongoing occupation, abuse and distraction of Israeli
security efforts, the demographic threat--and offers the public a
feasible alternative in the form of unilateral redeployment, then it has
a chance to recover its political appeal and beat the Likud.

Undoubtedly, both Ramon and Mitzna have their weaknesses as potential
leaders. And the road to a governing coalition with a firm majority
capable of removing even a single settlement is a long and arduous one.
But unless something dramatic happens on the Palestinian side--unless a
more worthy leader emerges to replace Arafat and a better system emerges
to replace his back-room dictatorship--and unless and until the US
administration recognizes that its interests require it to play a much
more aggressive role in our conflict, this is the best way to proceed.

