The Israeli idea of unilateral separation and the debate that has ebbed
and flowed in Israeli political circles, reflected widely in the Israeli
media, has never been attractive to Palestinians. That was correct
during the government of former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Barak and it
still true today. Palestinians flatly do not accept the principle of
Israeli unilateral steps and so have never been excited enough about
plans for unilateral separation to discuss them in their media, public
gatherings or political meetings.

To Palestinians, the proposals for unilateral separation are just
another form of maintaining the Israeli occupation on certain parts of
the Palestinian territories. They are also perceived as a way for Israel
to unilaterally determine the future of the relationship between the two
sides--boxing Palestinians in on "their" side, without access to
resources and divided by Israeli settlements and areas of control.

To do so unilaterally, rather than with the signature of the Palestinian
side as Israel would like, is only to do so by virtue of Israel's
advanced military superiority. All versions of separation, of course,
take into consideration Israeli interests--whether they be security,
economic or political. As such, these proposals not only disregard
Palestinian interests, but Palestinian rights under all international
laws and norms.

Indeed, the very idea of separation is racist in its essence in that it
is accompanied by restrictions on movement along the borders of 1967,
but only in one direction. Palestinian movement to the west, towards
Israel, is restricted as much as possible, while Israeli movement to the
east (in the form of settlements, security outposts and buffer zones) is
allowed.

It also contradicts the basis on which Palestinians and the
international community build their approach to the problem and its
resolution--that of international legality. Palestinians are always
sensitive to any move that is not based on this international legality,
which safeguards Palestinian positions and rights.

In short, the separation concept is intended to move Israel's borders
eastward in order to accommodate the illegal Israeli settlement policy,
which to this day continues to steal Palestinian land for the purpose of
settling Jews. Acceptance of the separation policy is equal to
legitimization of the illegal settlement expansion policy and other
facts on the ground created by Israel, such as changes made to occupied
East Jerusalem.

Those who hope that plans for separation would move us closer towards
peace, or even calm the currently fierce struggle against occupation and
the Israeli violence used to maintain that occupation, will be sorely
mistaken. Plans for unilateral separation leave certain parts of the
Palestinian territories under occupation, do not solve the issue of
Jerusalem and do not bring closure to the problem of the Palestinian
refugees. These are major components of the conflict that must be
addressed and agreed upon with the support of international legality and
in a way that is acceptable to both sides.

What proponents of unilateral separation hope is that if the two peoples
become invisible to one another, their conflict will diminish. But the
conflict cannot be taken care of by shutting the door on Palestinians.
The conflict will end with a courageous admission of the injustice that
has been perpetrated on the Palestinian people and with corrections to
those injustices that adhere to international law. Palestinians say
simply: the occupation must end in its entirety--including the areas of
East Jerusalem and the long arm of the settlements--and the suffering of
Palestinian refugees alleviated in line with United Nations Resolution
194.

