Saudi Arabia Crown Prince Abdullah's statement, seen by the outside
world as a significant Saudi political initiative, has created a great
deal of noise in the Middle East and among concerned states. As such,
many have viewed it as a genuine political initiative, while others see
it only as a maneuver.

But in order to gain proper understanding of the initiative, it has to
be put in context. The Saudis have maintained a high profile concerning
the Middle East conflict ever since the start of this uprising, but even
more so after the events of September 11. In particular, Prince Abdullah
presented a rousing speech to the first Arab summit conference after the
start of Palestinian-Israeli confrontations, a speech that strongly
advocated Arab support for the Palestinians, at the same time promoting
a peaceful solution.

Another indication of Saudi involvement in the regional dispute has been
the several statements and contacts made by Saudi Arabia attempting to
strengthen United States government involvement and produce a more
balanced American position. Many diplomats believe that the relatively
even-handed speech of United States Secretary of State Colin Powell just
after September 11 was a result of these Saudi efforts.

The events of September 11 and the war fought in Afghanistan put the
Saudi government in a position where it needed to show more vocal
support for the Palestinians and defend their cause, in particular the
struggle for Jerusalem and its holy sites. The Saudi government's
position backing the US war against Afghanistan and Al Qaeda, including
Osama Bin Ladin, the self-proclaimed defender of the Arabian peninsula
against American control, exposed the Saudi regime to growing opposition
from its own people, who were increasingly sympathetic to both Bin
Ladin's rhetoric and Al Qaeda's cause. In order for the regime to
compensate for its decline in popularity, it tried to raise the banner
of vocal support for the Palestinians, which, of course, also boosts its
popularity in the rest of the Arab world.

At the same time, Saudi Arabia had gained a bit of leverage over the
United States. Because the United States administration was worried
about internal political upset in Saudi Arabia, it felt that they had to
do something positive to shore up the weakening Saudi government. It is
clear that the Saudis wanted for the Americans to be--among other
things--less biased and more active in restraining Israeli aggression,
including that directed towards Yasser Arafat and his authority.

The Saudi initiative, albeit brief and unelaborated, touched on the most
fundamental concerns of both Palestinians and Israelis. It gave Israel
all of what it wants, which is peace, security, recognition and
integration and it offers the Palestinians an end to the occupation,
which is their number one concern. The Palestinians, officially and
unofficially, are in support of the ideas.

The result is that the initiative has proven very embarrassing for
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, who opposes an end to occupation.
In fact, he has found no way out of a head-on collision with the
initiative as it grows in momentum than to produce an unprecedented
escalation, one in which the Israeli army entered certain Palestinian
refugee camps sure to cause strong Palestinian reactions. As many as 30
Palestinians were killed in just 24 hours in that incursion. The next 24
hours saw the Palestinian reaction--the killing of 20 Israelis; today's
Palestinian death toll at the hands of the Israeli army is 15 and
counting. It seems that Sharon is achieving his tactical objective of
shifting the attention completely from the new initiative to the
bloodshed he commenced.

The problem with the Saudi initiative, despite its having received the
support of nearly the entire Arab world, is the lack of mechanisms for
its implementation. So far, during the last 16 months of confrontations,
there have been four breakthroughs--the Sharm Al Sheikh agreement for a
ceasefire sponsored by former President Bill Clinton, the Mitchell
committee report, Tenet plan and now the Saudi initiative. All of these
were received warmly, until Israeli diplomacy found a way (usually
through violence) for Israel to duck its responsibilities in
implementing these plans.

In addition, the lack of will on the part of the international community
to interfere and enforce criteria established by international law and
relevant United Nations security council resolutions is a major
component of Israel's continuing support. Without those criteria, the
conflict falls prey to the imbalance of power. The only outcome one can
see from here is that Sharon is proving more and more successful at
moving the Israeli-Palestinian relationship towards an existential and
intractable fight.

