Any comparative overview of intelligence capabilities between
Palestinians and Israelis can only begin by noting a tremendous
disparity. Arriving in Palestine in a hostile environment, the Jewish
settlers established rudimentary intelligence apparatuses as early as
1914. When the Jewish Agency was founded in the 1920s, it included an
Arab Affairs Department that collected information about the Palestinian
population and leadership.

Efficient intelligence was decisive in the 1948 War and with the
creation of the official Israeli army on May 26, 1948, the intelligence
branches took another form. Today, Israel's three main intelligence
agencies remain Aman, military intelligence; the Shabak (General
Security Service) which handles counterespionage and internal security,
including intelligence gathering in the occupied territories; and the
Mossad, created in 1951, which collects external intelligence, and is
entrusted with carrying out clandestine Jewish immigration (from Arab
countries, for example) and assassinations outside of Israel and the
occupied territories. Today Israel is making use of and developing some
of the most advanced intelligence gathering technology available,
including its Ofek satellite, communications sensors and unmanned
hovercraft.

On the other side, up until 1948, Palestinians did not have a single
formal intelligence body. Even the most advanced Palestinian
paramilitary organization, /Al Jihad al Muqadas/, led by Abdel Qader
Husseini, had no intelligence branch. After 1967, the major Palestinian
faction Fateh organized /Razd al Thawri/, which means "revolutionary
intelligence", led by Saleh Khalaf (Abu Eyad). But when Abu Eyad was
captured by the Jordanian forces in 1970 and "broken", he ordered by
radio that Palestinian fighters surrender--and was quickly replaced by
Ali Hassan Salameh, who was later assassinated by the Mossad in Beirut.

This negligence of intelligence capabilities is rather symptomatic of
the Palestinian performance altogether. Historically, the Palestinian
struggle has been mainly spontaneous, sacrificial and demanding great
resilience from the population, at the same time that political and
military institutions show lack of planning. The Arab states did not
help this situation, refusing to offer logistic support. But this is not
the only way to understand this huge failure. It is my point of view
that the Palestinian leadership, including Fateh, was never really
serious about armed struggle.

Later in the 70s, the primitive intelligence Palestinian centers, mainly
found in Fateh, were divided up among the "Abus", or the major
Palestinian leaders. Some of the leaders at that time had real
influence, and Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat used this method to
divide and rule (while security branches are historically competitive
the world over, among Palestinians this competition was used to absorb
dissent). After the Oslo accords with Israel, there were at least ten
security apparatuses in the Palestinian Authority, and according to the
agreements, they were not to collect information about the Israeli side.

Israeli intelligence infiltration into Palestinian life after 1967 was
particularly dramatic because the entire occupation system was set up to
force any Palestinian trying to carry out a mundane task to come in
contact with Israeli intelligence agents. If one only remembers that in
four years of Nazi occupation in Belgium during World War II, the Nazis
succeeded in "turning" 11 percent of the population, using these
converts to provide intelligence, imagine the state of Palestinians
after nearly 40 years of occupation, in which Palestinians have largely
been cut off from the support of the outside world. All indications are
that Israeli intelligence infiltrated the high ranks of security
apparatuses and Palestinian political organizations. Palestinians have
tried to deal with this through the extrajudicial killing and torture of
alleged collaborators. But these have often been the small fish or those
already "burned"--those obviously working with the Israelis in supplying
permits, selling land or accompanying Israeli special forces.

There have been a handful of celebrated cases in which Palestinian
collaborators killed their own handlers. But if one considers the vast
number of Palestinian recruits, albeit many recruited against their
will, this number is relatively small. Many of these killings did not
result from a coordinated intelligence strategy, but from personal
initiative and the desire to inflict vengeance for humiliation incurred.
There have also been a handful of cases where Israelis have reported
being approached by the PLO to gather information. But these Israelis
were usually caught and arrested before they could do any damage, which
is just one more testimony to the effectiveness of Israel's intelligence
capabilities.

Finally, one arena that Israeli intelligence seems to have mastered (and
this is terribly pronounced in the media in the United States) is its
sophisticated manner of controlling the press. One of the main
departments of the Mossad deals with psychological warfare, propaganda
and operations of deception. But the great paradox here is that there is
also a great deal of "real" information about Israel in the press. While
Israel may not be a democracy for its Arab citizens, there is a large
body of security information to be found in the public domain. And in
truth, this is one more sign of the failure of Arab intelligence
efforts. Israelis are not afraid of releasing this information because
no one on the other side is paying attention.

