Israel and its neighbors--West Bank Palestinians, Jordan and southern
Syria--are all increasingly thirsty for new sources of water. Israel has
two distinct advantages over these neighbors: a well situated
Mediterranean coastline where desalination plants could be located, and
considerable technological know-how in the field of desalination and
water transport.

Israel's Arab neighbors have a number of longstanding demands regarding
rectification of alleged past injustices in the use and distribution of
existing water resources like Lake Kinneret (the Sea of Galilee) and the
Yarkon-Taninim (Western Samarian) Aquifer. Understandably, these are
disputed by Israel, which can make a strong case under international law
for its historic rights and its use of the water.

But even if Israel were to accept the Arab case and redivide its
existing resources, the resultant increase in water supply to the Arabs
would be so small, and the pace of population growth in the region so
fast, that both Israel and its neighbors would continue to require
desalinated water. The question is, how should Israel exploit its
advantage with regard to desalination in order to encourage regional
stability?

There are two possibilities. One is for Israel to take the initiative
and build, with international financing that it should be able to
recruit, a huge desalination reserve of, say, 500 million cubic meters
annually (Israel has currently begun construction of a first coastal
desalination plant for its own use, that will produce 50 million cubic
meters). We could then offer our neighbors, on advantageous terms that
could constitute an Israeli contribution to their economies, ample water
supplies. Conceivably we could recruit international participation in
subsidizing the price of desalinated water for Arab consumers.

Obviously, supply of the water would require the laying of considerable
pipeline infrastructure, and Syria and possibly the Palestinians would
balk at the very notion of such cooperation prior to ending their
conflict with Israel. But the availability of relatively cheap and
abundant desalinated water could, if managed well, constitute an added
incentive toward making peace (in Syria's case), reducing violence (in
the Palestinians' case), and improving relations (in Jordan's case).

Would this arrangement make our Arab neighbors more dependent on Israel,
and is this a good thing? Some would argue that, even assuming the
existence of ironclad international guarantees to assure the Arabs that
Israel would never turn off the spigot at a time of crisis in order to
exert pressure, Arab dependency on our water would ensure improved
relations. Others might argue that in any case Israel would be forbidden
by the rules of basic humane behavior (and by international pressure)
from ever reducing the flow of water, hence the potential Arab consumer
countries, Syria, Jordan and Palestine (the West Bank; Gaza could have
its own desalination capacity) could at some point in the future, if
relations deteriorate, afford to take the water and refuse to pay,
thereby conceivably further degrading rather than improving relations.

This danger points to a third option: encouraging the international
community to build, along Israel's coastline and on land donated by
Israel, the requisite water desalination capacity, and to undertake to
supply the water to Israel's Arab neighbors in a manner that is
independent, both commercially and diplomatically, from any connection
to Israel. In this way at least some of the advantages of water
interdependence might accrue to Israel, thereby enhancing regional
stability, while it could avoid having to deal with the "headache" of
ensuring timely payment of Arab water bills. On the other hand, one can
conceive here of a scenario whereby the international community supplies
the water and the Arab countries accept it gladly, yet they then proceed
to ignore Israel's role and maintain, at best, a cold peace with
Jerusalem, thereby effectively neutralizing Israel's gesture.

Underlying all of these possibilities is the fact that Israel, despite
all its current economic woes and the ongoing conflict with the
Palestinians, is far better equipped than its neighbors to deal with its
growing water shortage and its water requirements for the future. Once
active peace talks are resumed, it should ensure that water is not
allowed to work to its disadvantage, that water solutions contribute to
regional peace and integration, and that the international community's
general readiness to assist the region in solving its water problems is
integrated into the overall fabric of peace.

