The Middle East is one of the world's most water-stressed regions, and
the deteriorating quality and limited capacity of the region's water
resources are of paramount importance to all residents of the area.

Since much of the freshwater that is available in Israel and the
Palestinian Occupied Territories comes from shared sources i.e.,
groundwater and surface water, water has been a subject of several
Israeli-Palestinian agreements namely: the Declaration of Principles of
1993, the Gaza-Jericho Accord of 1995, and the Interim Agreement on the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip of 1995 (hereinafter "Interim Agreement").
As a number of issues related to water were not resolved definitively in
the Interim Agreement, water was listed as one of the main subjects to
be negotiated in the permanent status negotiations.

Until the Interim Agreement, the water resources of the Occupied
Territories were under the direct control of the Israeli military
government, which in turn was guided in its policies by domestic Israeli
government institutions, including the Water Commission. The Commission
drastically limited Palestinian access to and use of freshwater from
aquifers in the Occupied Territories. In contrast, however, it has
allowed illegal Israeli settlements in the Occupied Territories vastly
greater consumption of the same water sources. On average, when
including Israelis living inside the Green Line, Israelis consume more
than four times as much water as Palestinians on a per capita basis.

Under the Interim Agreement, the situation did not improve much for the
Palestinians. Israel retains veto power over Palestinian development not
only of groundwater that is shared with Israel but also that which is
wholly Palestinian, in the sense that it does not flow from the
territories into Israel. The disparities remain blatantly inequitable
and unreasonable.

Israel does not attempt to justify its disproportionate share of the
international water resources such as the Mountain Aquifer and the
Jordan River Basin under the doctrine of equitable utilization. Instead,
to the extent that Israel has attempted to justify its conduct on legal
grounds at all, it has relied on its prior use of the water resources.
The prior use or historic use doctrine states that a pattern of use of
water in an international watercourse gives rise to a right to such use.
This argument is baseless for two fundamental reasons:

One of the most fundamental principles of international law is that no
benefit can be derived from an illegal act (ex injuria non oritur jus).
Israel's belligerent occupation of the West Bank and Gaza since 1967 is
unlawful. Even if its occupation were not unlawful, Israel's conduct in
administering the Occupied Territories and exploiting Palestinian
natural resources violates its obligations as an occupying power under
the law of "belligerent occupation" (the 1907 Hague Regulations and the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949), and also violates the principle of
Permanent Sovereignty over Natural Resources.

With regard to water from the Jordan River, Israel's unlawful military
actions have enabled it to appropriate more than an equitable share of
the waters of the Jordan River basin. Its occupation of the Golan
Heights and, until recently, the "security zone" in southern Lebanon,
contrary to United Nations Security Council resolutions, have resulted
in Israeli control of many of the headwaters of the Jordan River.
Furthermore, Israel expelled Palestinians from the area of the West Bank
bordering the Jordan River, destroyed Palestinian wells (including wells
built pre-1967), denied access by Palestinians to Jordan River water
resources, and established settlements (most of which are agricultural)
in the strip of land bordering the River, all in violation of the law of
belligerent occupation and laws on the use of international
watercourses. These unlawful actions have enabled Israel to divert
water, drill wells, and otherwise appropriate water to which it would
otherwise not have been entitled. International law does not permit
Israel to profit from its illegal actions.

As mentioned, Israel has defended its present allocation of water on the
ground of "prior use." But if prior use conferred absolute rights, as
Israel appears to claim, states such as Turkey and the United States
would have been sharply restricted in the development of their
international watercourses, in particular the Euphrates and the Rio
Grande respectively, and Ethiopia would be virtually precluded from any
development of the Blue Nile. But this is not the law.

According to international law, the fundamental principle is that
international watercourses must be used in an equitable manner. Article
6 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of Non-Navigational Uses
of International Watercourses, (1997) included "existing" uses as one of
the factors that may be relevant in determining equitable
utilization--i.e. in the present case, in arriving at an equitable
apportionment of waters shared between Palestine and Israel. Although
"existing" uses may also be "prior" uses, neither of these circumstances
is automatically entitled to a particular weight in the balancing
process that is employed to arrive at an equitable apportionment.

For the above-mentioned reasons, the present allocation of water from
sources shared by Israel and the Palestinians violates the rules of
international law. Israel's use is inequitable because it cannot be
justified according to the factors relevant to equitable and reasonable
utilization. The West Bank is the recharge source of much of Israel's
water (80-85 percent of rainwater entering into the shared aquifers).
The Palestinian population in the Occupied Territories is more than half
that of Israel, yet Israel permits Palestinians to consume much less
water per capita than Israelis. In addition, Israel's use is
unreasonable because much of it is subsidized or otherwise wasteful, and
because it has been accomplished largely through the forcible prevention
of the Palestinians from gaining access to their rightful share.

If the Palestinian and Israeli people are going to live as "equal
neighbors," the principles of equity and equality must form part of the
peace process itself. A peace agreement that is made at the further
expense of the Palestinian people's rights and needs will not achieve
that result--on the contrary, it will only serve to strengthen the sense
of injustice and national grievance among the Palestinian people, and
would not therefore produce a meaningful, durable and sustainable peace.

