ALTHOUGH THE Palestinian-Israeli conflict has been dominated by ideology
and politics, there are some very significant "side" issues that could
very well maintain and prolong the conflict if they are not duly solved.
One of these is economics and especially tourism, both of which tie
directly to the problem of Jerusalem and its status. Another is the
dispute over water, a rare regional commodity, and an issue tied
significantly to the territorial component of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict.

Since the beginning of the Israeli occupation, access to water and the
areas under which sit the main existing water reservoir have been an
important guiding principle for Israel as it mapped out its settlement
policy--and then later strategized over its negotiations policy in
official or non-official talks. Certainly, maintaining access over water
reserves has also been a factor in determining the map for "unilateral
withdrawal" that some Israelis believe is a way out of the current
conflict. Palestinians, on the other hand, believe that they have the
right to regain not only the territories occupied in 1967 according to
international law, but also the water resources in those areas, again in
accordance with international law.

Palestinians, too, raise another dimension to the water problem that
stands apart from the need to solve the problem of equitable access to
water according to the existing body of international law that addresses
water issues. That other, even more pressing dimension is the current
grave and damaging inequality in water use rights. Israel's occupation
of the East Bank and Gaza has allowed it to control the management and
use of water in such a way that independent studies show that Israelis,
including illegal settlers in the occupied territories, use 20 times
more water than Palestinians in the occupied territories are allowed to
use. That adds to the suffering of the Palestinian people and can only
be considered collective punishment by Israel in its attempt to slow
down Palestinian development to facilitate its occupation. These
policies are easily described as racist in origin.

Those who want to solve this conflict must understand that its
complexity and multi-dimensional nature make it impossible to do so by
singling out certain aspects--like security, for example--and making
their resolution a precondition for talking about the other issues.
Palestinian rights should be dealt with in a comprehensive manner, and
in reciprocation, Israeli rights will be dealt with in totality.

It is simply not possible to solve one aspect such as water, while
excluding others. Take territory or economics or settlements--all are
tied inextricably to access to water. That is why the only possible
approach to solving this conflict once and for all is the most simple
and most legal: to end the Israeli occupation and its control over all
aspects of Palestinian daily life, including their access to water. If
the water is shared in full accordance with international law, Israel
can expect to demand and receive a comprehensive full peace, security
and prosperity.

