The Israeli intelligence agencies deserve the respect and admiration of
every Israeli and of every intelligence professional for their excellent
performance in the daily fight against Palestinian terrorism. The level
of their penetration into terrorist cells and the rate of success in
foiling terror attempts are amazing, especially taking into account that
the perpetrators of these attempts are aware of the risks and are taking
extreme precautions to avoid exposure.

At the same time, the intelligence agencies are playing an important
role on the strategic level in shaping the perceptions and the grasp of
reality of the decision makers and the public at large. But in these
areas their record is far from stellar. The recent example of the war in
Iraq shows how intelligence services in the United States, the United
Kingdom and Israel failed to present a perception of Iraq that
approximates reality. The reason for the discrepancy in performance
between the tactical and operational level on the one hand and the
strategic level on the other, lies in the difference between the nature
of intelligence that is needed in these two different domains.

In the first domain the intelligence professional traces specific steps
that are being taken by the adversary. This is done by collecting
concrete information about these steps and developing a system of clear
early warning indicators. In contrast, in the strategic domain one has
to analyze and understand long term and dynamic political processes and
identify political intentions. This is much more difficult, because only
seldom are there concrete and reliable data that enable this kind of
understanding. Usually understanding stems from analysis of the
political behavior of the other party and broad interpretation of the
available data, enabling the construction of conceptions that explain
the other party's behavior. But these interpretations and conceptions
are deeply affected by prior conceptions and prejudices held by the
intelligence analyst.

Another weakness of the intelligence analyst is his inclination to look
only at the other party and ignore the role of his own side. This
tendency makes it difficult to understand the dynamics of processes in
which the actions of the other side are in many cases only a reaction to
the actions of the analyst's side.

These problems explain why, during the last three years of violent
conflict between Israel and the Palestinians, we have repeatedly heard
about disagreements between Israeli military intelligence and the GSS
(General Security Service) on issues that pertain to understanding of
the Palestinian side of the conflict. One salient example is the debate
between the two services regarding the initial outbreak of violence.
While military intelligence described the intifada as a premeditated and
planned act decided by Arafat, GSS analysts tended to see it as a more
complex process in which spontaneous reactions and decisions with
unintended consequences played an important role.

A second example concerns the understanding of Hamas' behavior in the
last couple of months. Military intelligence argues that the leadership
of the organization decided to temporarily cease suicide bombings in
Israel, while the GSS denies there is such a decision and explains the
cessation of Hamas suicide bombings with reference to the successes of
the Israeli security community in foiling them.

The decisions of the political leadership in Israel, as well as the
views of the Israeli public, are derived to a great extent from their
perception of reality. This implies that through their intelligence
assessments, the intelligence agencies have considerable influence over
policy. This influence is not always benign.

A clear example of the problematic nature of the effect of intelligence
assessments is the phenomenon of self-fulfilling prophecies. If the
prevailing intelligence assessment holds that a certain Israeli action
will not achieve the hoped for results, then it is only natural that
this course will not be followed enthusiastically, leading to its
failure. That is exactly what happened during the Mahmoud Abbas (Abu
Mazen) government and the recent Palestinian hudna, or ceasefire. The
prevailing military intelligence assessment was that Abu Mazen's
government would fail to prevent terrorism and would eventually
collapse, and that the hudna would not hold. Accordingly the Israeli
authorities did not do all they could to help Abu Mazen, and Israel did
not restrain its military activities in a way that would afford a better
chance of success to Abu Mazen's government and the hudna, both of which
indeed collapsed. One cannot say with certainty that the same results
would not have been reached without Israeli actions and abstention from
acting, but certainly these had a role in the failures.

Leaders are tested in the way they use intelligence. They have to
understand the limitations of the intelligence agencies and the
problematic role they sometimes play, and not easily forego their own
reasoning and intuition. Because of their experience and the intuition
they develop during their political careers, in many cases political
leaders have a better and deeper understanding of the leaders on the
other side.

