The Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas) government and the roadmap
                                                 are in effect Siamese
twins; they must be analyzed and monitored together, or not at all. It
was not a coincidence that the official establishment of a Palestinian
cabinet headed by Abu Mazen was followed a day later by the official
presentation of the roadmap. The two are part of the same process that
has emerged from the Israeli-Palestinian war, the Iraq war, and the
evolution of American policy.

Two corollaries follow. First, from the Israeli standpoint, in the
foreseeable future there will not be a better opportunity to work our
way out of the current conflict and at least stabilize the situation. If
Abu Mazen--who so dramatically rejects the path of violence--fails, or
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat successfully intervenes to spoil the
process, or the roadmap fails, or the United States loses interest,
there is no alternative peace process waiting in the wings. If we deal
with the unfortunate fact that Arafat still retains too much control,
particularly over security organizations, by turning down this process
or demanding a different prime minister or even capturing and exiling
Arafat--this will not improve our chances for ending this conflict, with
its disastrous economic, human and political consequences for both
sides, but rather worsen them. So we all have to work with what we've
got, even as the pressures on Arafat--internally, from genuine
reformers, and externally, from the Quartet--must continue.

Secondly, in view of the antithetical positions held by Abu Mazen and
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon regarding final status issues such
as Jerusalem and the size and borders of a Palestinian state, the
roadmap as constituted is not likely to generate a two state solution
within the next two years. Hence the very best we can do at this point
is a successful phase I, the phase of stabilization, security and
reform. This is still preferable by far, for both sides, to the current
status quo of warfare. It will almost certainly generate a new and
positive dynamic that will affect Israeli as well as Palestinian
internal politics.

Assuming that all three sides--the PLO/PA, Israel and the Bush
administration--understand and accept the constraints and limitations of
this process and the crucial link between Abu Mazen's fortunes and the
future of the roadmap, there remain three key issues for immediate
resolution.

One is Israel's demand for amendments to the roadmap. The overall thrust
of Sharon's attempts to change the roadmap's parallel process into a
sequential one, to avoid restoring a PLO presence to East Jerusalem, to
"legalize" settlement outposts, and to elicit Palestinian renunciation
of the right of return from the outset, is that Sharon is simply looking
for excuses to avoid getting onto the slippery slope of the roadmap.
Here the US must be firm. The only truly legitimate Israeli demand at
this point is that the Palestinian effort to end the violence be
sincere, and be seen to be working.

The Bush administration should continue to tell Sharon to stop quibbling
and to dismantle all 70 outposts established on his watch over the past
two years in accordance with phase I--if only for Israel's own good, to
avoid the slippery slope of "South Africanization" of the conflict. The
best way it can deal with Israel's very understandable demand that the
Palestinians renounce the right of return if they want Israel to
recognize Palestinian statehood is to amend the roadmap by eliminating
phase II with its highly problematic "provisional" Palestinian state.
This would relegate all final status issues to what is currently phase
III, which in any case will be hard to complete under the current
leaders. To sacrifice the entire process before it begins due to
Israel's insistence on a final status issue--legitimate and vital on its
own merits--is folly.

But regarding an end to violence, the administration should make clear
to Abu Mazen's government that it must take control over /all/
Palestinian security organizations, and that a mere /hudna/ or ceasefire
with Fateh's own al-Aqsa Brigades, along with Hamas and Islamic Jihad,
will not suffice. These organizations must be disarmed and their
terrorist infrastructures dismantled. Israelis must be convinced that
the existential threat posed by the suicide bombings is ending, not
merely being frozen for the interim. They will feel very little sympathy
if and when confronted with the argument that Palestinian solidarity is
ultimately more important than the real security needs not only of
Israel, but of Palestinians as well.

For months I have been writing that there is no peace process because
none of the three principals--Bush, Sharon, Arafat--has a realistic
strategy for peace. The advent of the roadmap and of the Abu Mazen
government signals that, just conceivably, in a best case scenario, we
are witnessing the beginning of change within this triangle of doom and
frustration.

It will be an uphill battle.

