Q: What is your impression of the election process that
brought Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas) to the Palestinian premiership?

A: The process was disappointing in some ways, because of Arafat's
influence and his unwillingness to accept procedures that are supposed
to affect the mode of the war against terrorism. But the outcome is
positive from the standpoint of anyone who wants to arrive at a
political peace process.

Q: What is the government of Israel demanding of Abu Mazen
and his government?

A: What has happened within the Palestinian leadership was
intended primarily to advance those who recognize that it is Palestinian
society that requires a war against terrorism. Therefore, I don't want
to address this from the Israeli standpoint. This is first of all a
Palestinian interest. Palestinian society has been damaged by terrorism
at its deepest levels. So there is both a Palestinian internal interest
and a government interest.

From Israel's standpoint, in order to move forward the infrastructure of
terrorism must be eliminated. If any Israeli, right or left, wants to
advance a peace process, he will undoubtedly not do so if confronted by
a terrorist state. Hence both sides have an interest.

Q: What is your approach to the /hudna/ idea, a ceasefire
among the Palestinian factions, as a solution to terrorism?

A: This is a very disturbing idea. I fear this will not be
sufficient, will not provide the right road to the beginning of a
process, because the [terrorist] organizations will simply acquire more
weapons and prepare for the next round. A /hudna/ will provide imaginary
external quiet that will arouse deep fears among Israelis.

Q: Will the Americans suffice with a /hudna/?

A: The Americans aren't playing games here. We saw that in Iraq.

Q: Can you address the amendments that Israel is asking for
in the roadmap                                                 --the
additional demands upon the Palestinians?

A: One issue regarding which I have taken the lead is substantive.
President Bush is leading a solution of two states for the two peoples.
Therefore the historical deal will involve the creation of a Palestinian
state in the sense that this encompasses an arrangement for the [1948
Palestinian] refugees. Accordingly, the translation of Bush's speech
                                             [of June 24, 2002] into the
roadmap is defective. Hence I demanded that the discussion of a
Palestinian state be held simultaneously with the discussion of the
refugee problem.

Q: Perhaps your argument is with phase II of the roadmap.
After all, it moves up the discussion of one final status issue, a
Palestinian state, but delays the other final status issues to phase III.

A: Phase II as it stands is problematic, since it advances one
topic of final status. Therefore we must move the discussion of the
refugees to the same phase. This is the only way we can accept the roadmap.

Q: Perhaps the solution is simply to skip this problematic
phase II. . . ?

A: If we skip phase II this will return us to August 2000.

Q: Reportedly, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon suggested that
the Palestinians agree to define Israel as a Jewish state, perhaps
instead of renouncing the right of return at this time.

A: Defining Israel as a Jewish state is not sufficient because
this moves the issue to demographics, to a discussion of percentages,
and I'm talking about a matter of principle. If the establishment of a
Palestinian state does not provide a solution to the Palestinian people,
then there is no reason I should agree with it. I propose a solution
that moves both sides into the process.

Q: It's generally understood that Abu Mazen does not forego
the right of return at the level of principle.

A: I regret Abu Mazen's position regarding the right of return.
There's no point in the process unless we get this amendment.

Q: And if the US, which opposes any changes in the roadmap,
opposes the amendment you propose?

A: If the US opposes the change then I, who want to reach an
agreement, won't be able to support the process.

Q: Can you address the other Israeli comments on the roadmap?

A: There were additional amendments, for example regarding the
timetable for the process. Obviously the entire concept of phasing was
intended to move from one phase to the next in an atmosphere of
security. If the timetable is not clearly locked into performance tests,
this is insufficient.

Q: Isn't the process in any case likely to break down in
phases II and III in view of the clash between the views of Sharon and
Abu Mazen?

A: The process itself can be beneficial. If we see that there's
security in phase I, and a period of time passes during which we see
that the terrorist organizations have been eliminated and the textbooks
changed, then our readiness to compromise will also change. That's why
phasing may provide a better chance.

