The use of intelligence has been a crucial aspect of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict for the simple and obvious reason that this
conflict has always been highly militarized. Equally, the arena of
intelligence has reflected the great asymmetry between the two parties.
Israel has put all its resources into building intelligence capabilities
that rival those of most countries in the world, in the process
developing cutting-edge technology, vast human resources and key
intelligence cooperation with superpowers, most prominently the United
States. Palestinians, on the other hand, have tried to offset Israel's
comparative advantage in the field of intelligence by concentrating on
other ways and means in which they have a comparative
advantage--Palestinians are under no illusions that they can compete
with Israel in matters of security.

One example of this was the manner in which each party handled Israel's
continuing attempts to uncover underground cells of resistance during
the time Israel occupied all of the West Bank and Gaza, from 1967 to
1996 when the Palestinian Authority was established. When Palestinians
discovered that they were not wily enough to deceive Israeli security
agents and avoid capture, they began to use their imprisoned cell
members as recruiters and organizers, so that a major center of
recruitment became the prisons themselves. That cyclical situation led
Israel to a situation where it had 18,000 Palestinians in jail, but no
end to the resistance in sight.

In this current round of confrontations, the gathering of intelligence
has become even more important than ever. Israel has been very
successful in tracking targets for assassination and arrest by using its
human and technological intelligence. But this tactical success, which
reflects a Palestinian failure on the flip side, has not been "good"
enough to allow Israel to achieve its objectives of security and peace
simply because the Palestinians, who are no match for Israel on the
intelligence front, are resorting to other tools in which they have the
comparative advantage thus ensuring that Israel is never near to
achieving its political goals.

In a very cynical and callous view, the tactic of suicide bombings is
one Palestinian attempt to neutralize Israeli intelligence gathering.
Setting aside for a moment its immorality or horrendous destruction, the
fact is that when the bomber destroys him or herself along with the
weapon and target, key pieces in the intelligence trail are destroyed
and Palestinians are somewhat able to narrow the gap between themselves
and the vast Israeli security machine. The bloody give-and-take between
an occupying state and its resources, on the one hand, and a people
trying to make up the difference, on the other, is where we are today.

The incredible machinations that go into Israeli intelligence-gathering
and the political hay that is made of its use and manipulations only
highlight the truth of the matter: political differences remain at the
heart of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, and no sophisticated
techniques will save us all from this bitter struggle until the same
sophistication is applied to advancing a political solution.

