Palestinian-Jordanian relations are more complex than the relations the
Palestinian people have with any other Arab country. The relations
between the two sides have taken two extremely different forms during
the last 50 years. They have ranged from the Jordanians fighting
side-by-side with the Palestinians on behalf of the Palestinian cause
against the Israeli occupation to the Jordanians fighting against the
Palestinians, as happened in 1970.

The most recent and significant turning point in these relations was the
disengagement decision made and implemented by the late King Hussein in
1988. Since then, relations between the two sides have gradually begun
to take a more normal and stable form. On a public and official level,
the Palestinians have begun to realize that there is no longer reason to
fear a Jordanian desire for a role in the West Bank. The Jordanians have
also begun to feel the tension between the two sides dissipating.

Jordan has played an especially positive and constructive role vis-a-vis
the Palestinians in the peace process. At Madrid, the Jordanians
accepted to form a joint delegation with the Palestinian side, to which
they gave complete freedom of maneuver in terms of negotiations with
Israel.

What brought a possible Jordanian role back into discussion was the
desire of the Israeli government of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to
invite the Egyptians to play a role in the Gaza Strip and the Jordanians
in the West Bank. In Gaza, there was a place for such a role, simply
because Israel has some intention of making a certain kind of
withdrawal. In the West Bank, however, Israel does not have any
intention of making a serious withdrawal, which leaves its invitation to
the Jordanians devoid of meaning.

Jordan, for its part, has not expressed interest in this Israeli
invitation except within the limits that its coordination with the
Palestinian Authority allows, which is simply the possible Jordanian
training of Palestinian security. The June presence of Jordanian
military officers with Israeli military officers on the West Bank side
of the Jordan Valley created suspicion among Palestinians when reported
in the media. Immediate, precise Jordanian assurances helped remove the
concerns created by the incident among Palestinians, particularly on the
official level. The fact remains that Israel has no intention of giving
up its occupation in the West Bank, which leaves no room for competition
between anybody concerning the replacement of that occupation.

Throughout the history of Israeli occupation since 1967, a Jordanian
political role in the West Bank has been a tempting idea for Israeli
governments. More than one--including those led by Labor and
Likud--entertained this possibility. It has never and will never work,
in spite of the very special relationship between the Jordanian and
Palestinian peoples.

Sharon's rule makes both Jordanians and Palestinians particularly
sensitive to any Jordanian role, because Sharon is the author of the
"Jordan is Palestine" theory. For this reason, it is a waste of time for
any country to try to find alternatives to the solution of giving the
Palestinian people their right of self-determination in their homeland,
Palestine. The Palestinian people have already made it very clear that
they reject any attempt to affect them in deciding on their leadership
and their future. So while deviating from the principle of
self-determination might buy time for this extremist government in
Israel, it will never bring either of us any nearer to our objective--if
that objective is peace and security for Israel, freedom and
independence for Palestinians.

