Over the past three years Israeli intelligence has raised its skills in
combating Palestinian terrorism to a high level of success that is
already being emulated by American forces in Iraq. In contrast, at the
strategic level, Israel's intelligence services have a far more
problematic record over the past three years. They have not been
particularly successful at such tasks as comprehending Palestinian
intentions and the inner workings of Palestinian decision-making,
understanding why the peace process failed and violence broke out, and
finding ways to alter Palestinian strategy.

Again and again our military and political leaders, smugly certain that
they have figured out Palestinian strategy, have misinformed us that
"Yasser Arafat is finished" and that we have emerged victorious. Nor did
Israel's tactical successes prevent General Security Service (Shabak)
head Avi Dichter from announcing recently that the security community
had "failed to deliver security" to the public.

Have the Palestinians suffered similar failures of intelligence at the
strategic level? From an Israeli standpoint this certainly appears to be
the case. This determination is rendered difficult by the fragmentation
of Palestinian society and chaotic nature of the Palestinian security
community, which point to the likelihood that more than one strategy is
being employed (for example, Hamas' strategy that does not aspire to a
two state solution, compared to that of Fatah, which ostensibly does).
Indeed, some Palestinian analysts believe that Arafat is essentially not
capable of strategic thinking at all! At least some Palestinian
strategic decisions seem to have been predicated on a misreading of both
Israeli society and the international situation, i.e., on intelligence
failures that have had tragic consequences for all concerned.

The suicide bombings, for example, did not "break" Israel; instead they
produced the security fence, an unexpected and undesirable outcome from
the Palestinian point of view. Settlement expansion did not stop despite
repeated attacks, and by and large settlers' morale has not been broken.
Nor has the violence bent Israel's will: the current government, and any
likely successor, will not offer the Palestinians more concessions than
those that were already rejected as inadequate at Camp David/Taba. The
Karine A affair (smuggling arms from Iran) represents a gigantic
miscalculation by Arafat and the Fatah leadership in view of the Israeli
and American reaction. And Arafat's ongoing failure to appoint a
capable, high-level ambassador in Washington appears to reflect a
fundamental misunderstanding at the strategic level of the importance of
the American role in our conflict.

One compelling reason for Israel's strategic intelligence failures
appears to be a dangerous inclination of intelligence analysts to adjust
their assessments to meet the expectations of the political leader. In
the case of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, who believes that the
Palestinians can be subdued militarily and compelled to produce a
leadership that accepts his solution and his "map", Israeli intelligence
has at times fallen into line by assessing publicly that this was
possible, or was already a fait accompli, even when there was no basis
for this determination. Key figures in Israeli intelligence readily
connived in contriving to persuade Washington to adopt Sharon's
political approach, and in convincing the Israeli public to accept the
Bush administration's questionable strategy of improving the atmosphere
for Israeli-Palestinian peace by conquering Iraq (the "positive domino
theory").

But this politicization of intelligence and deviation from healthy
intelligence norms is not confined to a right wing prime minister. In
retrospect it is now clear that in Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's day,
Israeli intelligence at times failed to warn adequately of the
ramifications of Arafat's ongoing rejection of Israel as a Jewish state
and his support for violence and extremist views, apparently because it
sought to provide the prime minister with assessments that supported his
peace initiative.

In defense of the Israeli intelligence performance at the strategic
level, a number of important points must also be noted. For one, there
have been impressive strategic intelligence successes, such as correctly
assessing the reticence of Egypt and Jordan to become deeply involved on
the Palestinian side of the conflict. Then too, the traditional
restrictions against factoring in one's own government's political and
strategic initiatives and their ramifications for the reactions of the
other side are a particularly strong constraint on intelligence success
in the current situation, which mixes a political process with the
struggle against terrorism and guerilla warfare. This points to an
additional factor: the absence in the Israeli system, despite repeated
recommendations of commissions of inquiry, of an echelon that operates
between the intelligence establishment and the decision-makers, and that
integrates Israeli strategic and operational thinking with the
intelligence estimate or estimates and comes up with recommended
alternative courses of action for the government to consider.

This is a political rather than an intelligence failure. By the same
token, at the end of the day the absence of a realistic strategy for
peace, or at least for ending the violence, is most emphatically not the
fault of intelligence, but rather of the highest echelon of
decision-makers: Sharon and Arafat.

