The formation of the new Palestinian cabinet was accompanied by both
high expectations and heavy interference. The recent events in the
Palestinian political system were characterized by fierce internal
debate and struggle typical of healthy democratic life--a struggle that
was inaccurately portrayed externally as a fight between two individuals
over competing political strategies. The subsequent involvement of
outside players and attempts to influence the course of events have
unfortunately--by virtue of their emphasis--set us all up for
disappointment.

During the course of the cabinet selection, different Palestinian
players (and not just the president and prime minister-designate)
utilized the chance to try to forward their various points of view, a
debate that culminated in competition for the vote of the Legislative
Council or parliament. This exercise reflected a healthy democratic
system not seen in most neighboring Arab states. But instead of being
described as a positive and unique discussion, the differences within
the Palestinian political sphere were described by the press as an
impediment to the evolution of a "reformed" Palestinian cabinet (what is
"reform", anyway, but healthy democratic debate?).

In the realm of politics, there are actually no significant differences
between Palestinian President Yasser Arafat and Prime Minister Mahmoud
Abbas (Abu Mazen). Both come from the same school of thought and in all
previous internal Palestinian disputes have come down on the same side.
The most recent example of that was during the discussions of the
Palestinian delegation to the Camp David negotiations.

Even Abu Mazen's remarks about the need to stop the military components
of the Intifada reflect the views of President Arafat, who tried to
pursue that course of action through several ceasefire declarations and
statements calling to stop the violence, as well as practical attempts
to carry out his objectives. Unfortunately, Israeli behavior--whether
the ongoing Israeli crackdown on Palestinian security organs or the
continuous Israeli killing of Palestinian civilians--manufactures
Palestinian anger, extremism and the spirit of revenge.

The attempts to interfere in this internal debate from outside were not
constructive and were even harmful, but in the final analysis did not
prevent an outcome in harmony with the will of the Palestinian people as
represented by the affirming vote of the Legislative Council. Still,
because this new Palestinian government was a response to the demands of
those with the power to influence the Palestinian-Israeli conflict (such
as the United States), its completion created high expectations among
both Palestinians and Israelis. The change also occurred after the war
in Iraq, which many analysts had concluded would push United States and
the Quartet in general to "do something" vis-a-vis the Middle East and
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

But realists have no reason to nurse hopes due to the change within the
Palestinian cabinet, simply because the obstacles to replacing the
ongoing violence with peaceful negotiations are not found on the
Palestinian side. Despite the danger of sounding like a broken record,
it is fact that the individuals in charge of the Israeli government,
including the prime minister himself, have political and ideological
problems with the central notions of the peace process: ending the
occupation, stopping settlement expansion and adhering to international
law. These tenets also make up the basis for the Quartet roadmap
                                                . That is why, until we
see a change that replaces the current government in Israel with a
government that can "belong" politically and ideologically to the peace
process, it is very difficult to be optimistic about a change in
direction.

