The Palestinian nonviolent movement is as old as the Palestinian
liberation movement itself. As far back as the 1930s, Palestinians
engaged in nonviolent protests and demonstrations against the British
Mandate authorities. This form of protest peaked with the breakout of
the 1987 intifada. That uprising, which was for the most part nonviolent
in nature, brought immediate international recognition to the
Palestinian people, forced Israeli society to recognize Palestinians as
a "people" and to recognize their legitimate leadership, and finally led
to a peace process. The failure of that peace process, known as the Oslo
peace process was not due to the means that led to the negotiating
table, on the contrary; it was largely due to the lack of continued
mobilization and support by the Palestinian leadership of the popular
Palestinian nonviolent resistance movement. Nonviolent resistance should
have continued as a means to balance the imbalance at the negotiating
table, viewed by the Palestinian leadership as the only way of attaining
the legitimate rights of the Palestinians.

The failure of the peace process led to the breakout of the second
intifada in 2000. Again, Palestinians initially engaged in nonviolent
forms of resistance, but the Israeli military response to these protests
was more brutal and forceful than at any time before during the
occupation. This convinced some groups within the Palestinian community
that only the use of arms and suicide attacks to balance out the pain
being heaped upon Palestinians would be effective in making the
occupation as costly as possible to the Israeli public. This, however,
combined with the lack of a clear strategy and a clear vision to
mobilize the Palestinian population in nonviolent forms of resistance,
emboldened the Israeli government to take full advantage of the change
in the rules of engagement after September 11, 2001 and attempt to
de-legitimize the entire Palestinian liberation movement, linking its
goals with the means used to achieve them. The Palestinian armed
resistance, labeled as "terrorism" by Israel, was portrayed as the goal
of the Palestinian liberation movement rather than a means, justified or
otherwise.

The legitimacy of the goals of freedom and independence should not be
viewed through the lens of the "means" used to achieve these goals. The
struggle to end the occupation and establish an independent Palestinian
state does not gain or lose legitimacy if nonviolent means are preferred
over violent means and vice versa. Even with the changes in
international politics and a steadily growing voice within the
Palestinian community criticizing and condemning the armed resistance,
particularly those actions that target Israeli civilians, the legitimacy
of the Palestinian struggle is embedded in international law,
international conventions on human rights and numerous United Nations
resolutions, up until and including the most recent decision by the
International Court of Justice regarding the separation wall.

A more important question deals with the issue of efficacy. Are the
means used effective in achieving the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people?

When discussing armed resistance, Palestinians must recognize both the
internal and international implications of continuing the armed
resistance. The gross imbalance of power, the unrestrained and brutal
actions of the Israeli military, and the change in the direction of
world politics have left Palestinians defenseless and isolated in the
face of daily aggressions. The armed resistance, even armed defense, has
been effective only in creating excuses for greater Israeli aggression.

But to say that one is ineffective is not to show that the other isn't.
When it comes to nonviolent resistance, the question most people ask is
how do you nonviolently resist your prison guard when you are in prison?
How do you resist the occupation when you are surrounded by walls and
fences? Examples of nonviolent resistance from across the world
highlight one important factor: direct confrontation and contact with
the enemy is vital to expose that enemy's brutality and unjust policies.
In Palestine today, however, Palestinians are trapped in a prison. Going
on hunger strike means absolutely nothing, while protesting and marching
means walking around in circles. So what nonviolent tactics can be used
effectively to expose the occupation and affect its end?

The answer is threefold. First, a strong leadership committed to the
principles of nonviolent resistance and community building must be
established. The initial focus will be on the need to unify Palestinian
communities and reestablish trust between the leadership and the people.
This should be followed by the development of a long-term internal
strategy to build a nonviolent resistance movement on a massive scale.

Secondly, the Palestinian population inside and outside of Palestine
must be mobilized in mass campaigns beginning with a boycott of Israeli
products campaign and moving on to more dangerous protests at check
points, on settler roads, and near international border crossings.

Finally and simultaneously, the Arab, Muslim, international streets as
well as the Israeli peace camp must also be mobilized to support this
nonviolent Palestinian movement. Sustained and significant popular
protests against Israel will eventually pressure the Israeli government
to take the necessary steps towards peace.

Nonviolent resistance is never easy. It takes tremendous dedication,
discipline and sacrifice. And while no means are guaranteed effective,
the nonviolent approach attempts to neutralize the power of the enemy
and to target the collective consciousness of the populace rather than
empowering enemy extremists by handing them the blind and unconditional
support of a people fearful of annihilation.

The international community has declared that the death of the late
President Yasser Arafat is an opportunity to revive the
Palestinian-Israeli peace process. The Palestinian community needs to
see the death of their president as an opportunity to reinforce the
commitment to the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people and
to achieve these aspirations by engaging in effective nonviolent means
of resistance and community building.

