This last draft of the road map is not very different from its
predecessor, a reality that appears to reflect the acting balance of
power (the Americans presented the drafts and the Europeans, Russians
and United Nations representatives attempted--with little success--to
make changes). Through the course of drafting the road map, Palestinians
were left with the impression that the influence of the other members
over the Americans is limited, albeit positive. That in itself is a bit
disappointing, simply because Palestinians were initially pleased by the
change from the American monopoly over the peace process into collective
sponsorship by the Quartet.

Case in point is the fact that the United States managed to "convince"
the other members to suspend the Quartet's activities until after the
Israeli elections, thus automatically postponing them until after the
new government's swearing-in, and perhaps even after a looming war in
Iraq. In other words, the road map has lost its momentum.

As for the content of the document, the destination of the road map
seems to be to some degree consistent with the requirements of
international law: specifically, ending Israel's occupation of 1967 and
allowing for a contiguous, viable Palestinian state, and a solution for
the refugee problem acceptable to both sides. The road towards that
destination, however, remains littered with problems.

The first problem is that any new negotiations engagement over
substantive issues must, according to the road map, be preceded by two
impractical preconditions: Palestinian success in carrying out security
tasks and Palestinian success in reform. While Palestinians themselves
want to be successful in these two tasks, their success has been
intentionally made difficult (if not impossible) by the nature of
ongoing Israeli practices designed specifically in a way that inspires
new Palestinian violence and prevents any reform progress. The Quartet
has missed the crucial point that a balanced first phase would have
concurrently addressed violence committed by both sides, while
requesting simultaneous Israeli military withdrawal from Palestinian
areas occupied since September 2001 and Palestinian reforms.

The other major problem in the new road map is its second phase, which
calls for negotiations over a state with provisional borders. This phase
is completely unnecessary and seems only designed to allow Israeli
leader Ariel Sharon to manipulate endless discussions and put the two
sides at loggerheads. The intent of the other phases are clear: the
first phase is intended to move the two sides from confrontation to
quiet, and the third phase is needed to have final resolution. But the
second phase, which calls for talks on provisional borders and a
one-year state with the "attributes of sovereignty" is pointless. Why
not get on to the business of final borders? One can almost guarantee
that this stage will be used by Israel to stall the process and avoid
getting to the most substantive stage of negotiations.

