Israelis and Palestinians have conflicting views on the role of
international intervention in the conflict. This should not be
surprising since, left to their own designs, the relationship of
Palestinians and Israelis will always be to the advantage of the more
powerful (i.e., Israel), whether that relationship is one of peaceful
negotiations or confrontation. When the international community is
involved, is usually comes bearing specific agreed-upon terms of
reference that the parties must adhere to, a fact that reduces the
influence of the imbalance of power.

Palestinians also prefer international intervention because during the
seventies, they made strategic adjustments to their political position,
in which they dropped their demand for the reinstatement of their
historical rights and decided instead to stick to those legitimate
rights that are consistent with international legality. For that reason
Palestinians encourage international intervention, in the hopes that it
will be based on international legality and consistent with
international law. In other words, Palestinians have always tried to
compensate for their weakness by trying to inspire international
intervention that will call for international legality and force Israeli
compliance.

The problem with this approach has always been that the lone superpower
dominating the United Nations and the Security Council always protects
Israel from international intervention and from the need to implement or
enforce relevant international law.

The recent history of the conflict demonstrates that the United States
only interferes or allows international involvement when the conflict
extends beyond the Palestinian-Israeli arena and affects either regional
or international interests. The most obvious example of this was the
Madrid Conference, which was a major historical intervention by the
international community led by the United States. At that point, the
Arabs who participated in the attack on Iraq needed that intervention
badly, as their publics were increasingly accusing the United States of
double standards between Israel and Iraq. The resulting foment was
affecting American credibility in the Arab world and consequently
weakening United States regional allies.

It now appears that the significance of the last 18 months of
confrontations is that the conflict is now beginning to spill out into
the region, strengthening fundamentalists in the Islamic world,
embarrassing the Arab regimes and demonstrating the impotence of Arab
leaders. The gist of the demonstrations in the Arab streets was directed
at the United States and those Arab regimes. The result has been a
feeling of international urgency and now calls--especially in
Washington--for an international conference on the Middle East.

There has been a lot of distortion over the nature of the current
conflict, a distortion that is preventing intervention. Israel has
succeeded, especially in the United States, to create the false
impression that this conflict is about terrorism and the means of
countering terrorism. The discussion has turned into one over how to
combat terrorism, whether Arafat can do that himself or whether Israel
must do it for him. The whole world is now waiting to see the results of
this fight: how many have been arrested, how many have been killed, and
will it all work?

That's too bad, because this conflict can only be solved if there is
serious international intervention on the basis of international law,
backed up by some powerful incentives to influence the parties and force
them to adhere to that legality. This conflict is one of
de-colonization, a conflict that will never end no matter how many
Palestinians are killed and arrested, and unless there is an end to the
Israeli occupation. The problem does not come from a handful of
individuals that might be arrested or killed, but out of the genuine
desire of a people to achieve independence and freedom like every other
nation in the world.

