Hunger strikes by terrorist prisoners in the facilities of the Israel
Prison Service are a periodic ritual, repeated every few years when
prisoners judge the circumstances to be ripe. Let me note at the outset
that the state of individual rights and the prison conditions of
security prisoners and detainees in these facilities are very good in
comparison with any parallel population of terrorists or terror suspects
in the world, and particularly in the West. Witness, for example, the
conditions of prisoners held by the United States in Guantanamo and in
Abu Ghraib and other prisons in Iraq. This judgment is reflected in the
human rights report disseminated by the US State Department for 2003:
"In general, conditions in the Israel Prison Service's facilities accord
with international standards".

In the course of the past two and a half years there has been a steady
erosion of "benefits", i.e., additional privileges not mandated by law,
by international convention or by orders--the kind awarded to prisoners
as a humanitarian gesture and on condition that they do not contravene
state or prison security rules. This erosion was a direct consequence of
the violation of these conditions by the prisoners, including the
planning and directing of terrorist attacks from jail, attacking and
wounding of prison staff, attempting escape, and smuggling of forbidden
goods into prison. Among the prisoners are dozens of suicide bombers who
failed to carry out their mission, and who have no inhibitions about
carrying out a suicide mission aimed at as many representatives of the
"enemy" as possible.

Until recently, despite this dynamic, the prisoners had not reacted in
an organized manner. They well understood that every privilege denied
them and that degraded their living conditions, was a direct reciprocal
consequence of the disobeying of orders and violation of security. Thus,
the smuggling of a cellular phone in a baby's diaper ended unrestricted
meetings and physical contact with children at the close of family
visits, while the smuggling of a phone in the genital area led to a
renewal of strip searches of both prisoners and visitors.

The prisoners eventually announced their intention to strike, ostensibly
in protest at this erosion in conditions, even though in the course of
the past year no further deterioration had taken place, with the
exception of glass barriers replacing screens at family visits--this,
too, due to the smuggling of goods and messages, including instructions
for terrorist acts. The real circumstances for the strike were, in my
assessment, as follows:

For one, internal dynamics within the Palestinian Authority were at
play: the prisoners' sensed that the public had forgotten them; there
was rivalry among factions that had senior representatives jockeying for
leadership in jail; and the strike was an opportunity for the
Palestinian leadership to divert public opinion from domestic anarchy.

Secondly, the decision to strike was affected by political issues,
including the anticipated unilateral Israeli disengagement without
negotiations, the ongoing difficulty in carrying out acts of hard
terrorism (punctuated by the Beersheva attack, some two and a half weeks
into the strike), the recognition that the near future holds no likely
prisoner release, and the hope placed on Hizballah as the only possible
vehicle for release.

At the bureaucratic level of the Prison Service and the Ministry for
Public Security, the arrival of a new prisons commissioner a year ago
and a policy review led the prisoner leadership to assess the time was
ripe for a confrontation with the sovereign power.

Finally, at the international level, there was an attempt to ride the
"wave" created by the recommendation of the International Court of
Justice at The Hague regarding the security fence and the related
declaration of the United Nations, in order to generate pressure on
Israel as a violator of the rights of both civilians and "freedom
fighters" and to de-legitimize steps it takes against terrorism in the
territories and the prisons.

But in the case at hand, the calculations of both the security prisoners
and the Prison Service appear to have been lacking.

The extremist prisoner leadership miscalculated the likelihood of
influencing public opinion in Israel, the territories and the world.
Around the globe, attention was focused on the Olympic Games. The brutal
suicide bombings in Beersheva eliminated any residual chance to hold the
world's interest. Moreover, the prisoners thought they could hold a
"deluxe" strike and continue to drink nourishing liquids like milk, soup
and juice and receive other additives like salt. But the Prison Service
rejected this request and left them with water alone, to the point where
some strikers abandoned the strike on their own, while others were
eventually given liquids and additives on doctors' orders.

The Prison Service publicized the strike long before it began, thereby
generating a momentum that obliged the prisoners to strike even if their
heart was not in it. At this stage there was even talk of possible
negotiations over some of the prisoners' "demands", thereby energizing
the strike yet further. This added an additional factor of confusion:
demands with regard to rules and conditions are within the sole
authority of the sovereign, i.e., the state by means of the Prison
Service, while prisoners can only request improved conditions. This is
not a negotiating situation between, say, the State of Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. Moreover, the strike could have been "broken"
before it began by providing the extra liquids and additives and
publishing the fact that in reality there is no strike at all, thereby
neutralizing public and international interest.

Under these circumstances it appears that neither the sovereign nor the
prisoners gained much from the strike. This was one more round that
ended in stalemate, part of a long war that is waged behind bars as well
as beyond. The prisoners, the PA leadership and the sovereign all knew
that we would not concede one iota of security, and that no substantive
change in prison conditions was possible as long as terrorists continue
their struggle and exploit every opening to attack.

On the other hand, the bitterness and frustration caused by the present
situation are liable to generate acts more extreme than deluxe hunger
strike protests. Sadly, the extremists among the prisoner leadership
only enhanced their power and negative influence, while the more
moderate leadership continues to lose power and influence.

