Q: The government led by Ariel Sharon appears to be moving
Israel toward a regional or international conference. Isn't this a
slippery slope, a trap?

A: The central question is whether bringing a third party into the
conflict constitutes a loss of control over my fate and endangers my
existence? A regional conference is a positive idea, since [Palestinian
leader Yasser] Arafat has proven he's not a partner, and I and the
Palestinian people share an interest in reaching a settlement, peace and
stability. Egypt, Jordan and the United States have a similar interest
in view of the ramifications of the conflict for them. We can agree to
such a process. But it's impossible to hold such a convocation
completely without Arafat--even though he is not the leader who will
bring his people to peace.

I'm not happy to discover that there is no Palestinian partner, and
therefore I'm looking for additional actors who will dilute Arafat's
control. Together with them we can define a joint interest; hence
Israel's initiative to convene a regional conference. Still, it's
important that we retain the capacity to prevent an imposed settlement.
I'm not in the same camp as Shlomo Ben Ami [Israeli foreign minister
under Ehud Barak], who is prepared for the world to decide for us.

Q: What should be on the agenda of such a conference?

A: The Israeli public is now afraid of a Camp David-style solution
and fears to find itself living alongside a terrorist state. In any
event, Arafat is not interested in ending the conflict. Thus it is a
mistake today to enter into an accelerated, dramatic process that
produces a terrorist state. As an alternative we must look for a way to
generate a normal Palestinian order of life based on territorial
contiguity. We need to discuss economic and humanitarian relief, the
prevention of friction with our soldiers and the cessation of terrorism
and incitement. We must not place time limits on the process. We can
agree to discuss final status, and within that framework look for
interim territorial understandings that reduce pressures. The Arab
countries that aspire to represent the Palestinian cause will not tell
us it's "all or nothing".

Q: Israeli Intelligence circles have long argued that it is
Arafat who seeks to "internationalize" the conflict. How does a Likud
minister arrive at a readiness to go to an international conference? How
do you explain the evolution of this approach?

A: After Camp David I understood that Arafat does not want to end
the conflict. During Israel's last elections fate brought together two
actors: one, Arafat, who doesn't want to end the conflict, and the
other, Sharon, who presents a program for an interim settlement. This
was a better match than Barak-Arafat. Following the creation of the
Sharon government we embraced proposals that could advance this
approach, such as Tenet and Mitchell.

With the passage of events we realized that Arafat was not even capable
of reaching an interim agreement, and that an alternative Palestinian
leadership, while a good option, was impossible and unrealistic. That
brought us to a readiness to deliberate with more moderate Arab and
international actors.

Q: What is your attitude toward the now cancelled United
Nations fact-finding commission on Jenin?

A: There are two problems here. First, Israel finds itself in a
bizarre situation vis-a-vis the international community. By definition
we share its values: democracy, equality, moral values. In terms of
applying norms, we are partners and the Palestinians are not. Yet the
international community ignores Palestinian violations of norms while
taking a very strict approach with us. The second problem is that we
have no trust or belief in either the judge or the tribunal. Here for
example is Syria, a member of the Security Council, that supports
terrorism yet participates in decisions on normative humanitarian
issues. There's almost no place where we can get a fair hearing. The
Jenin affair spotlighted the problem, but it's not new.

Q: Can't the UN be helpful in border issues?

A: In Lebanon in May 2000 we carried out Security Council Resolution
425 fully. Yet the UN still does not enforce a ceasefire on Hizballah,
and even became entangled in the abduction affair of our soldiers.

Q: What's your attitude toward European involvement?

A: Arafat will try to bring the European community, which supports
him, into the process. In my view the European position is based on an
unacceptable double standard. Europe confuses its empathy for the
Palestinians with the messages it sends Arafat, which are understood by
him as a green light to continue his terrorism. Note, for example,
British Prime Minister Blair's embrace of Arafat three weeks after
September 11.

Q: Is there room for an international military force in a
solution to the conflict?

A: Certainly as observers following an agreement. But I have a
problem with an international military force that is deployed here to
separate the two sides. It will create a technical separation without
terrorism ending, while it ties my hands and keeps me from fighting
back.

