The roadmap has aged well. Its prescription for a three-stage return to
an Israeli-Palestinian peace process is probably more relevant now, with
the parties entering a ceasefire and resuming close contacts, than it
was on April 30, 2003, when it was first published. Like Oslo, Geneva
and other peace plans, it has major flaws. But they loom no larger today
than they did originally.

Yet all parties concerned should avoid pushing for an active return to
the roadmap. To do so at this juncture would be detrimental to any hope
of progress.

The immediate reason for this assertion is the problematic nature of the
obligations imposed on the two sides in phase I of the roadmap. A second
important reason is the counterproductive nature of phase II. The most
important reason has to do with the basic positions of the two leaders,
Mahmoud Abbas and Ariel Sharon, concerning phase III.

We are "in" phase I, and in some ways--e.g., Palestinian constitutional
and financial reform--have been for 18 months. In recent weeks, the
beginnings of a ceasefire have taken hold, the new Palestinian
leadership has renounced violence and terrorism, "free, fair and open
elections" have been held and security cooperation resumed, and progress
is being made toward release of prisoners and withdrawal from territory
by Israel--all phase I obligations.

But PLO/PA leader Abbas is not likely to fulfill the phase I demand that
he dismantle the terrorist infrastructure and collect weaponry; he seeks
to co-opt rather than confront the Palestinian terrorist organizations.
In parallel, PM Sharon is not about to dismantle the West Bank
settlement outposts, as phase I mandates; he prefers to dismantle entire
settlements, in Gaza and the northern West Bank. Neither leader is
carrying out all his phase I obligations, yet both are moving in a
positive direction. To demand of them full compliance with phase I at
this point would be foolish. So phase I must be amended.

Phase II, "an independent Palestinian state with provisional borders",
is a mistake. It is superfluous. A state with provisional borders is
virtually without precedent in international relations. While the
roadmap dictates that this strange phase last just six months, there are
strong indications that this is where Sharon would like to stop the
process--which explains why Abbas is so suspicious of phase II. If there
is going to be a peace process, there is no reason why the two sides
cannot move from phase I to phase III, and resume final status
negotiations. Phase II should be deleted.

Yet it is doubtful there will be a phase III peace process under Sharon
and Abbas. The former is deeply suspicious of all peace agreements with
Arabs, and will not offer Palestinians the territory they need in the
West Bank and Jerusalem for a viable state. The latter clings to
positions on the right of return that are anathema to the Israeli
public, which views them as antithetical to the spirit of a genuine two
state solution.

So hostile to phase III of the roadmap is Sharon that he adopted a
policy of unilateral disengagement at least in part to neutralize it. To
actively re-impose the roadmap framework on Sharon now is to risk
sabotaging disengagement. And murky and problematic as Sharon's ultimate
objectives are, the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and the northern West
Bank six months from now is a goal worth pursuing. Indeed, it is the
only game in town. To the extent it can be coordinated between the two
sides, with Egyptian and other international support, so much the better.

Supporters of phase III want to re-impose the roadmap now so as to
ensure that disengagement does not become a dead end with regard to the
West Bank--that it leads us in the right direction. Their motives are
understandable, but they are advised to slow down, be patient and
recognize the immense historical importance of the current step of
dismantling settlements. Under the best of circumstances the next six to
nine months will witness a successful but extremely traumatic Israeli
withdrawal, a long process of genuinely ending Palestinian violence, and
several Palestinian elections and key reforms such as reorganizing the
security services. By the time these steps have rebuilt a modicum of
bilateral confidence we will almost certainly be plunged into Israeli
elections, about a year from now.

In other words, it will be close to 18 months before the next,
post-disengagement Israeli government is in place and fully functioning
in Jerusalem. This is the real timetable that confronts us, not that of
the roadmap, which was supposed to have been completed this year. If all
these steps do succeed, the Israeli public will in any case support a
government that opts for a peace process or for an additional phase of
disengagement on the West Bank, either of which constitutes welcome
movement in the right direction.

Meanwhile all parties concerned can continue to pay lip service to the
roadmap. That is harmless. And there is plenty of room for US, EU and
Egyptian carrots and sticks to ensure that Sharon releases prisoners and
removes roadblocks and Abbas ends the violence and cooperates with
disengagement. But any attempt now to inaugurate a renewed peace process
based on the roadmap could sabotage the important new departure that
Sharon has seen fit to undertake.

I, like many Israelis and Palestinians, hunger for a peace process that
leads to a two-state solution. In recent years, when there was no
disengagement plan (and no peace process), I consistently advocated
high-level US involvement and pressure. But right now that is the wrong
game.

