In the case of Palestinians, the role played by intellectuals in the
peace process is not cut and dry. On the one hand, Palestinian academics
are not organized in such a manner as to enable a clear definition of
their positions and contributions. On the other, intellectuals have
played oddly contradicting roles during the different phases of the
peace process.

To offer some background, in the eyes of the average Palestinian,
intellectuals form one of the most credible sectors of society. In a
survey carried out in the early 1990s, university lecturers came in
first in the public's response to a question concerning which sector of
society was most trustworthy. Intellectuals in Palestine have also
played a significant role in initiating and leading political parties
and political initiatives. These reasons likely explain why, when the
Palestine Liberation Organization elected to take part in peace talks
with Israel--a very controversial decision at that time--the Palestinian
leadership made a point of including a majority of intellectuals in the
Palestinian negotiating delegation to the Madrid conference and
subsequent Washington talks. Indeed, more than two-thirds of the
delegates were university academics and policy specialists.

At that time, some analysts explained this phenomenon by saying that
those who selected the delegates were trying to lend the talks
credibility and public support. Take, for example, highly-respected
physician Haidar Abdel Shafi, Birzeit University professor Hanan Ashrawi
and An Najah University politics professor Saeb Erekat, all of whom
represented Palestinians in the earliest days of the peace process.

Despite this interplay, Palestinian intellectuals have never managed to
actively influence the official decision-making process, particularly in
times of crisis. Just several years after the Madrid conference and the
establishment of the Palestinian Authority, academics were among those
in society most hostile to the peace process and to the Palestinian
Authority that resulted from this process. Polls showed that the
Palestinian educated classes were highly opposed to the Oslo process.
That opposition never translated, however, into political engagement or
the ability to change the course of events. In Palestinians' first
democratic and free elections intellectuals did not fare well at all as
they jockeyed for positions in the parliament. Career politicians, on
the other hand, particularly those PLO symbols that hailed from the
Palestinian Diaspora, were very successful in that same vote.

It might be said that while intellectuals have been "used" in this peace
process in a positive sense (i.e., by politicians to give the peace
process credibility and convince the public) they have never played a
significant role in conducting the peace process, determining its
course, or even building the positions that the leadership has adopted
in negotiations. Despite the many instances of intellectual engagement
in "track-two" activities, and despite the multiplicity of initiatives
coming from Palestinian thinkers and sometimes Palestinians and Israelis
in cooperation, historically these initiatives have proven ineffectual
and insignificant.

