After the overwhelming Palestinian success at implementing the ceasefire
amid international concern, and with the passing of a very quiet few
weeks in which the Palestinian side brought an almost total halt to
military activities against Israelis, Palestinians are looking forward
to the next step. From a Palestinian perspective, the current ceasefire
can only be consolidated and maintained through a political process that
re-instills the Palestinian people with the hope that it is possible to
peacefully negotiate an end to the Israeli occupation.

Palestinians consider it odd that Israel continues to count tens of
Palestinian "terrorist acts," considering the complete lack of
casualties on the Israeli side. Meanwhile, another crucial component of
consolidating the ceasefire is Israeli reciprocity. Palestinians should
be assured that this is not a unilateral ceasefire but rather a
Palestinian initiative that will also bring an end to Israeli violence
and restrictions.

During the last few weeks of Palestinian ceasefire, the Israeli army has
continued its offensive operations in Palestinian areas, maintaining
Israeli tanks in areas under Palestinian control and invading
periodically to kill, arrest and demolish. The most recent incident
occurred in Gaza, where three Palestinian teenagers were killed and
their bodies then mutilated gruesomely by the Israeli army.

Moreover, the Israeli policy of restricting the movement of
Palestinians, pursued with growing intensity by Israel for over one
year, has continued in spite of the successful ceasefire. All of these
events leave Palestinians with grave doubts over the possibility of
consolidating this ceasefire.

While United States special envoy Anthony's Zinni's recent visit to the
region renewed Palestinian hopes, unfortunately, he has already departed
again without any hint of launching the political process that many were
hoping for. He did not even suggest a timetable for implementation of
the other components of the Mitchell report, which include
confidence-building measures, cessation of Israeli settlement
activities, implementation of those articles in the Palestinian-Israeli
interim agreements that have not yet been implemented, and resumption of
talks on final status issues from where they left off.

It is possible that Zinni has once again bought the Israeli argument
that a successful ceasefire has not yet happened, but it is also
possible that he failed to convince this Israeli government of the need
to move forward and fulfill its obligations as per the Mitchell report.

The time is right for either an American or an internationally
coordinated effort to attempt to fill the current vacuum with a
political initiative. There is a great need to build on the current
ceasefire, which is the first of its kind since the beginning of the
Intifada fifteen months ago. If this vacuum is not filled with a
political initiative, then chances are great that Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon will once again succeed in renewing confrontations between
the two sides. Without an end to the Israeli siege and other
provocations, the Palestinian Authority will be unable to justify its
position, its hold on the ceasefire will loosen and the current opening
will be lost.

