The Palestinian-Israeli conflict has always been highly
internationalized. That began in the beginning of the last century when
the foreign powers of Britain and France (with the involvement of Italy
and Russia) agreed to divisions of control over different parts of the
Middle East, including Palestine, that were codified in the Sykes-Picot
agreement. After that, the British decided to support the establishment
of a Jewish state through the infamous Balfour Declaration.

The following half of the century, which included plenty of
international engagement and a great number of United Nations
resolutions, did not actually have a lot of affect on what was happening
on the ground. The era of the peace process, in particular the last
decade of the 1900s, was heavily infused with the precepts of
international legality and the need for international mediation, which
Israel always sought to avoid.

There are two reasons for Israel's dodging. First, Israel is
unquestionably the more powerful party in the conflict, which means that
as long as it can avoid international involvement, it has the
opportunity to wield its comparative advantage to alter matters to its
own liking. Second, international legality is for the most part dead set
against Israel's continuing attempts to expand its control on the land.

With the failure of the peace process at the turn of the century, many
politicians and analysts began to conceive of alternative approaches,
which included more active involvement of the international community.
The creation and influence of the Quartet (a working group of Russia,
the United Nations, the United States and the European Union) was one
result. The Quartet's deliberations have since produced the "roadmap
                                                " document, which
requires that the international community have a monitoring role over
the two parties--the first time in recent history that the international
community has agreed to practical engagement.

Unofficially, there have been several other proposals. These suggest
giving international bodies like the United Nations a more hands-on
role, perhaps even putting the occupied Palestinian territories under
mandatory control. At face value, these ideas reflect the failure of the
bilateral nature of the Oslo accords between Israelis and Palestinians.
Growing interest in third-party participation, monitoring or even
running things on the ground is a departure from the conventional
wisdom, especially within Israel and among Israeli-supporting states,
powers and individuals, which consider bilateral Palestinian relations
and negotiations the only way to go. Palestinians, for their part, have
always encouraged this type of involvement for the simple reason that
anything that moves, replaces or loosens the Israeli occupation's hooks
on the Palestinian territories is considered a step forward, not only
because this implies movement towards ending the occupation, it also
implies an improvement in the grueling daily life of Palestinians.
Nothing can be worse than occupation.

All lessons of recent history lead us to believe that just leaving
Palestinians and Israelis on their own aggravates the situation. To do
so allows Israel to wield its military superiority as a means of
suppressing the other side, at the same time increasing Palestinian
feelings of desperation and the public tendency towards resistance,
extremism and inflexibility. That is why the most convincing approach
for our time is to allow third-party involvement as extensive as
possible, with international law as its guide, and assurances that
guarantee each party's legitimate rights.

