The Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci once made the distinction between
what he called "critical" and "organic" intellectuals. Critical
intellectuals are typical of developed civil societies, in which
intellectuals view themselves as critics of power and as generally being
non-conformists; organic intellectuals are more prevalent in societies
in which individual moral responsibility is not highly developed, and
intellectuals see themselves in the role of spokesmen for a collective
identity. The latter frequently appear in societies still in the throes
of nationalism.

This distinction may be helpful in assessing the role of Israeli and
Palestinian intellectuals in their respective societies: it may also
explain why so many attempts at "dialogue" between intellectuals from
both societies have frequently been disappointing.

Most Israeli intellectuals--writers, academics, artists--view themselves
as the moral critics of their own society, standing in the prophetic
tradition of "speaking truth to power"--to the power of their own
society. Hence the Israeli press--and Israeli literature--are full of
intellectuals and writers viewing their own society--its politics, its
government, its dominant myths and narratives--through critical lenses:
Amos Oz, A.B. Yehoshua and David Grossman are just three of the more
prominent writers who represent this critical vein in the Israeli
intellectual discourse. Most of them view themselves as good Israeli
patriots in a generalized sense, but they do not shy away from
criticizing--in newspaper articles, books and media interviews at home
and abroad--Israeli policies or some of the dominant Israeli myths.
There are obviously exceptions, but this critical role is true of most
Israeli intellectuals. Just read /Ha'aretz/.

Most Palestinian--and Arab--intellectuals view their role differently:
not as a vehicle for criticism of their society and its dominant values,
narratives and myths, but on the contrary: as the true bearers of
Palestinian (or Arab) nationalism. It is for this reason, for example,
that the most radical criticism in Egypt or Jordan of the peace treaties
with Israel has come from intellectual circles. For them, any
accommodation with Israel, let alone Zionism, is a breach of faith, if
not outright treason. These intellectuals may be Nasserists, former
communists or Islamic radicals; but they are indubitably intellectuals.
Few are the intellectuals in the Palestinian or Arab community in
general who dare to speak truth to power, or question the basic
narratives of Arabism: what has happened in the last years to perhaps
the one truly critical Egyptian intellectual, Sa'ad Eddin Ibrahim, or
earlier to Sadiq Jalal al-Azm in Syria, just shows how rare are the
cases of such nonconformist intellectuals in the Arab world.

This of course has far-reaching consequences for the general weakness of
civil society and democracy in the Arab world.

It is this discrepancy between the self-images of Israeli and
Palestinian intellectuals which makes the encounter between the two
groups so futile. In the dozens and hundreds of recent
Israeli-Palestinian dialogues, a familiar pattern emerges: the Israeli
intellectuals usually appear, in various degrees, critical of their own
government's policies, occasionally also of some basic tenets of
Zionism; the Palestinian intellectuals, on the other hand, repeat the
Palestinian narrative, criticize Israel--its policies, sometimes its
very existence. Hardly ever does one hear a Palestinian intellectual
question Palestinian policies, let alone the Palestinian master
narrative. If there is criticism of the Palestinian Authority, it is
that it is too accommodating to Israel, or that it is corrupt--the
latter being a merely generalized accusation. Israeli universities hold
dozens of conferences, in many cases with Palestinian participants, in
which various degrees of criticism of Israel are voiced. Hardly anything
similar can be seen in Palestinian or Arab universities.

It is because of this symmetry that so many Israeli-Palestinian
dialogues became so one-sided--with /both/ sides criticizing Israel. It
is for this reason that some Israelis have found these dialogues a sham
and an exercise in futility.

It is difficult to accept the claim that as long as Palestinians are
under occupation they cannot appear to be "disloyal" to their national
narrative: Arab countries are not under occupation, and the lack of
critical intellectuals in all of them is glaring--compared, for example,
to the courageous appearance of many critical intellectuals in
contemporary Iran. And in the Israeli case, critical intellectuals
appeared in the pre-1948 Jewish community, in the excruciating debate
about whether to use terrorist methods against the British.

Will this discrepancy between the disparate self-declared roles of
intellectuals in these two societies change? I don't know. Yet the
appearance of the UNDP Arab Human Development Report, written mostly by
Arab intellectuals, is a meaningful and hopeful harbinger of the
possibilities of a fundamental change.

