Despite its breaking the Arab consensus to sign the first peace treaty
with Israel approximately 25 years ago, Egypt has gained the deep
confidence of the Palestinian leadership. Consequently, Egypt has
assumed a central role in the search for a settlement of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. The Palestinians' deep-rooted belief that
their Egyptian partner has no hidden interests in Palestine has
consolidated their trust in Egypt. Furthermore, Egyptian support for the
Palestinian cause is firm and springs from profound and genuine
relationships that transcend considerations of present unstable
interests. In contrast, even though Egypt was the first Arab country to
sign a peace treaty with Israel, successive Israeli governments have
complained about the coldness of the peace with Egypt and the Egyptian
bias towards the Palestinians and Palestinian cause.

Despite having always been suspicious of the traditional Egyptian role
regarding the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon now wants to rely on Egypt, particularly with respect to security
aspects, to implement his unilateral plan for gradual withdrawal from
the Gaza Strip. In this respect, it appears that Egypt is responsive to
the Israeli proposal, leading us to the main problems raised within this
context: What are the motives behind Sharon's shift in position to rely
on Egypt to implement his plan? Why would Egypt respond to the Israeli
demand? Does such a response express a change in the traditional
Egyptian approach toward the Palestinian cause and the resolution of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict?

Five motives behind Sharon's pursuit for a central Egyptian security
role in the Gaza Strip can be recalled. First, Sharon became aware that
the withdrawal from the Gaza Strip, in order to be acceptable on
Palestinian, regional, and international levels, must ultimately be
completed and accompanied by serious and significant measures taken by
Israel in the West Bank. Furthermore, in order to gain credibility,
Israel must relinquish its control over the borders separating the Gaza
Strip from Egypt. Such a move would imply a kind of Palestinian
sovereignty in the Gaza Strip that could suggest that a foundation
towards establishing a Palestinian state exists.

Second, Sharon is expressing the stance of a broad Israeli majority that
no longer trusts transferring the responsibility of security within the
Palestinian territories to the Palestinian Authority. Within this
context, Israel is obliged to rely on a third party that it deems more
reliable, thus providing an opening for Egypt as a dependable substitute.

Third, according to Sharon, reliance on Egypt with respect to the
security of the Gaza Strip increases the confidence of all the Israeli
politicians who are hesitant to support his plan. Indeed, Egypt is a
country that has abided by its commitment to treaties and agreements.
Broad Israeli opposition to Sharon's plan necessitates his using all
means to ease the public's mind and facilitate the process.

Fourth, it would be favorable for Sharon to have Egyptian involvement in
his plan due to the confidence Egypt inspires in the Palestinian
leadership. As such, Egypt will be able to exert "positive" pressure on
the Palestinians to accept and implement the plan. Finally, Egypt's
involvement in assuming the security role in the Gaza Strip will serve
as a precedent and a reference for a possible future Jordanian security
role in the West Bank. Attaining advance security guarantees is
necessary for Sharon and Israel in order to be able to proclaim a
Palestinian state, which will be required to settle the
Palestinian/Arab-Israel conflict.

For its part, Egypt appears inclined to participate in the discussions
and implementation of Sharon's plan due to four principle factors.
First, Egypt is dissatisfied with the deterioration of the Palestinian
leadership and inconsistencies within the Palestinian agenda. According
to Egypt, these issues are a major threat to the Palestinian cause. If
the situation persists, any hope of realizing Palestinian rights will be
eliminated. Therefore, it is Egypt's obligation to contribute to getting
the Palestinian house in order as soon as possible in order to prevent
the current breakdown from reaching a climax.

Second, Egypt recognizes that Sharon's plan is Israel's last word
following the collapse of the roadmap
                                                , Beirut peace
initiative and Arab peace efforts. Egypt believes that it must play a
role due to the abnormal circumstances of Palestinians today. As long as
there is no alternative to Sharon's plan, Egypt appears convinced that
the plan will serve as a preliminary bridge obliging Israel toward
relinquishing the majority of the West Bank, which is necessary for a
comprehensive settlement.

Third, Egypt is concerned that, if Israel withdraws from Gaza, the Strip
could evolve into a hub of tension that would negatively influence
Egypt's steady relationship with Israel and the United States. In order
to safeguard its relationships, Egypt is willing to play a central role
in maintaining security in the Gaza Strip, particularly with respect to
control over the Palestinian-Egyptian border. Taking the aforementioned
factors into account eliminates justifications regarding border control
on behalf of the Israelis. Egypt believes that its central security role
will result in the complete termination of the Israeli occupation of the
Gaza Strip.

Finally, it is important to remember that Egypt has recently been under
tremendous American and international pressure and has been a direct
target of the US "Greater Middle East Project." Therefore, Egypt is
compelled to perform well with respect to pursuit of a
Palestinian-Israeli settlement, even though a comprehensive agreement is
not yet on the horizon.

Has the Egyptian role changed? Egypt is attempting to maneuver in order
to firmly sustain its principles regarding the Palestinian cause.
However, it is clear that Egypt and other Arab countries are
increasingly constricted in terms of the space they are afforded to
uphold their convictions. This situation has led to imposition of the
Israeli agenda, which is not conducive to a comprehensive, mutually
acceptable political settlement.

