Q: Is it too early to start talking about implementing the
roadmap?

A: I think it would be a big mistake if the Palestinians have
not already started the discussion with the Israelis on Israeli
implementation of their part of the roadmap. The Palestinians have
already started implementing their own commitments, and it would be
unthinkable for the Palestinians to be doing so without the Israelis
doing so as well. I believe the primary objective of the Sharm Al Sheikh
meeting should be to ensure that the Israelis as well as the
Palestinians are implementing those commitments to which they have
already agreed.

Q: Is it practical at this stage? Abbas seems to be
following a tactic of talking the factions into a ceasefire rather than
disarming them, as phase I calls for?

A: The roadmap certainly does not say that the only way of
establishing a cessation of violence is through Palestinian violence
against the factions. It leaves open the door for the Palestinians to
find ways to ensure a cessation of violence. The part that you are
referring to and which might be difficult for Abbas is the part that
deals with the collection of arms, but for that to start, the roadmap
also states that, with the help of the US in particular, the Palestinian
security forces will be restructured and rebuilt. Only once they are
restructured and rebuilt would those forces begin to collect
weapons--but only begin to them. I believe that from now until the end
of the first phase of the roadmap, which could be somewhere around the
parliamentary elections in July, the outcome of those elections will
clearly indicate that the newly established government has the
legitimacy to collect arms. The Palestinians therefore, by the end of
the first phase of the roadmap, will be in fulfillment of their
commitments.

Q: You mentioned the US. In her just-completed visit, US
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice didn't mention the roadmap once. Is
the US still interested in the roadmap?

A: I think the US at the rhetorical level is clearly committed
to the roadmap. In reality, however, neither the US nor Israel has
indicated that it is considering the activation of the roadmap in an
operational fashion so that it can become binding and so that the
actions of the two sides today would be measured by their commitment to
the roadmap. The Americans have difficulty in pressing Sharon on
settlements, for example, whether on freezing settlement construction
all over the occupied territories, including expansion for "natural
growth", or on the removal of outposts, which is also required by the
roadmap. The US, especially since the Israelis presented their
disengagement plan, has given priority to that plan and has to a large
extent ignored Israeli commitments with regards to the settlements.
There are other important Israeli commitments under the roadmap in
addition to the settlements, but certainly, for the Palestinians, the
settlement issue is one of the most urgent issues. If Israel does not
freeze settlement construction, efforts by the Palestinians to improve
the security situation are going to be seen by the Palestinian public as
an attempt to preserve the status quo, even as the Israelis continue to
change the status quo daily.

Q: You mentioned the unilateral disengagement plan. How
does that alter the picture?

A: The Israeli disengagement plan can be considered as part of
the implementation of the second phase of the roadmap. This
disengagement is in any case not going to start for another six months
or so. If we say the roadmap has already started, in six months the
first phase of the roadmap will be over, and it will be time for Israel
to begin, as phase II states, taking further action on settlements and
allowing the establishment of a Palestinian entity with provisional
borders. That entity must have contiguous territory. Therefore, in
implementing phase II, Israel not only needs to pull out of Gaza, but
needs to carry out significant settlement evacuation in the West Bank as
well.

Q: With the current Israeli government, isn't there a fear
that it would prefer to see a phase II Palestinian state and nothing else?

A: I think the Palestinians will make a decision on the state
with provisional borders based on what they see between now and when
that time comes. It may be that the Palestinian Authority does not wish
to change its current status to become such a state. What is important
is that the Israelis evacuate the settlements, and that they remove the
impediments to territorial contiguity. What the Palestinians wish to do
with that is optional. The roadmap clearly states that the Palestinians
have the option to declare a state with provisional borders. But the
Palestinians may decide that they would rather keep the current
political and legal status of the PA. This does not mean the Israelis
would not have to implement their own commitments. These are not
optional. The only optional part is whether the Palestinians should
declare a state with provisional borders.

Q: If the US is not serious in pressuring Israel, how
optimistic are you that we will witness a return to the roadmap?

A: I think it is very clear that we now have an opportunity in
the post-Arafat period in which the Palestinians are demonstrating a
commitment to the implementation of the roadmap and in fact are already
implementing it in terms of political reform, in terms of the
unification of the security services and in terms of ending violence.
Ignoring all of this could lead to a situation of great disappointment
on the Palestinian side, and this could have very serious consequences
for the ability of the president to continue to maintain the existing
ceasefire. This ceasefire is fragile, and will remain so unless it is
part of a larger political process, which starts with the implementation
of the roadmap and even goes further--we should be looking as quickly as
possible at permanent status issues if we start implementing the
roadmap. If Washington does not press Israel to go along with what the
US has itself proposed, I think the reaction on the Palestinian side is
going to be very negative.

