Q: You recently said at a lecture that "you can't build a
mass movement with the current level of violence." What did you mean by
that and do you think that it still holds true?

A: I think that it is extremely difficult to accommodate civilian
mass resistance with a high level of military clashes and violence
because it affects dramatically the level of risk people are required to
take by just stepping into the streets into a massive civil-based
movement. But people who want to engage in the struggle against the
occupation cannot just wait for things to be suitable for them and by
the book.

Q: Would you call yourself a supporter of non-violent
resistance and why?

A: From the start of this crisis, we have been organizing campaigns
including Palestinians and internationals in which we tried to remove
roadblocks, defy checkpoints, demonstrate in occupied areas and reach
families there. We have been engaged in front of tanks to prevent them
from moving. We have been doing protection work by providing human
shields for people who are threatened and constantly bombarded. We have
people who are now living in homes that are scheduled for demolition by
the Israeli army. We try to protect the homes and prevent punishment for
the families and try to go with farmers to their fields when it is
really risky and dangerous to do so.

Q: Why do you feel that these kinds of activities are important?

A: We need to find a way for the Palestinian masses to join in, in
an active way--not only in remaining steadfast throughout the hardship.
We think that having internationals with us will provide a better
platform to defy the occupation and to report the truth of what is
happening here and to urge the international community to think more
about the need to protect Palestinians when brutal war is being waged
against them.

We also believe that civil-based resistance can indeed be effective in
terms of cracking down on the tools of occupation, mainly the tool of
control. We believe that if we grow more massive we can really affect
this huge network of roadblocks and checkpoints and force the occupation
to rethink its policies in the Palestinian occupied territories.

Q: Does that mean that you do not think that armed resistance
is valid?

A: No, we state clearly that Palestinians have the full right to
resist the occupation with means that they think are suitable. We as the
Palestinian Solidarity Movement have decided, however, that our tool for
resisting the occupation is non-violence.

Q: How might Israel practice non-violence?

A: Occupation alone is a violent action that touches the lives of
everybody who is under the control of the occupier. Recently, I think
that the occupation has taken on a new form and now includes direct
killing of people, creating war zones and bombarding Palestinian areas.
There is no question, however, that the occupation is violent in using
all its of its force to crack down on the will of Palestinians to be
free and independent.

Q: What was your impression of the Common Ground poll that
questions Israelis and Palestinians on their approaches to non-violent
action?

A: On the Palestinian side, I think that Palestinians stated
clearly that we are willing to do whatever it takes to get out of this
mess. There is a large majority that supports non-violence, but that
same majority supports violence as well. That is my interpretation of
the results.

On the Israeli side, I think that most of the questions asked were
irrelevant. In my understanding, if we are to arrive at peace in this
area, we must have an active Palestinian resistance and an active
Israeli anti-war and anti-occupation movement. This is the shortest way
to conclude this conflict in a peaceful solution.

Therefore, on the Israeli side, I did not see questions such as, "Do you
support Palestinian non-violent resistance?" as relevant. The relevant
question is, "Would you be engaged in non-violent direct action against
your government's atrocities and violence in the occupied territories?"
That is what I want to see the poll results for.

Q: You sometimes stage joint demonstrations with Israeli
left-wing groups. How would you evaluate that experience?

A: I am interested in trying to attract as many Israelis as
possible to join in efforts towards ending the Israeli occupation of the
Palestinian territories. I consider this important and it has been
important in all of the different historic examples where people were
fighting against an occupier to liberate themselves on their land.

Secondly, in principle, we are willing to work with Israeli groups who
are willing to join active civil-based resistance against the Israeli
occupation. In particular, the invitation to the Israeli groups must
come from the Palestinian community in which the activity is happening.
By doing things this way, we give priority to Palestinian unity over
Israeli participation.

Now, this is sometimes problematic because some Israeli groups feel that
they are not adequately included in the planning period. But we think
our policy in this regard is right.

Q: How has the Israeli army responded to your joint activities?

A: Evidently, the presence of Israelis and internationals can
defuse the ability of the Israeli army to use greater force against
protestors and make soldiers think twice before starting to shoot or use
force.

But this is not always the case. We have instances where Palestinians
and internationals and sometimes Israelis have been shot at or injured
and treated brutally by the Israeli army. Soon, we will start a campaign
of olive picking, in which Palestinians and internationals and maybe
some Israeli groups will join villagers as they work on olive groves
that are close to settlements and in dangerous areas. In encounters with
settlers, we will have to see how much "protection" internationals and
Israelis can provide.

