Former Israeli prime minister Ehud Barak succeeded as no one before him
(not even the Israeli right wing) in destroying the infrastructure of
the peace process and pushing Israel to political extremism.
Ingenuously, he was able to destroy the peace camp inside Israel and
render it a camp of surrender, only defending itself instead of
defending the future of Israel. And then came Ariel Sharon, who reaped
what Barak had sown, expending neither sweat nor toil.

So as to avoid delving further into political events in order to
diagnose Israeli political shortcomings, I want to ask: Is it possible
under this ruling Israeli government to attain a historic reconciliation
based on a political solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict that
includes a Palestinian state within the borders of June 1967 with Arab
Jerusalem as its capital and a just solution to the Palestinian refugee
problem?

Very simply, the answer is an adamant "no." I insist that we have not
invented this "no" just because we do not like Sharon and his racist
cronies. It is true that I loathe this gang, but love and hate are
irrelevant in this situation.

Instead, my conclusion is based on recognizing and analyzing Sharon's
vision, politics and ideology. It is also based on the idea that real
peace, which needs sustenance to survive, must have specific
foundations. These foundations are an international consensus with
legitimacy in international law and which the political leadership of
the Palestinian people agreed to many years ago.

At this point, it cannot hurt to reaffirm those foundations as follows:

Principle One: Complete cessation of the Israeli occupation on all land
occupied in 1967 that falls within the June 4 borders, including Arab
Jerusalem.

Principle Two: The establishment of a Palestinian state on this land
side by side with Israel and not at its expense. The Palestinian state
must be real and on the ground, with full sovereignty and respect for
its agreements and its neighboring countries.

Principle Three: A just solution to the Palestinian refugee problem,
according to United Nations Resolution 194. This principle has been
turned into a kind of "scarecrow" by some Israelis in order to terrorize
and frighten Israel from a solution. For us, it is not in any way a trap
through which to swallow up Israel. Rather, it is a door through which
we must pass in order to bring finality to an issue that is the crux of
the cause.

I do not think that any of the negotiations that have taken place have
given the Israeli negotiators the idea that we want to swallow up
Israel. We are not so naive or foolish as to play a child's game of hide
and seek.

Principle Four: This is a complex principle in that it dictates a full
halt to the mentality of domination in all its forms; that historic
reconciliation is a historic event and not a historic slogan; and that
all segments of the Zionist movement, in particular the state of Israel,
realize that military power will not succeed in breaking the will of the
Palestinian people no matter how it is fortified by American might. The
world has tired of the occupation and will not accept the lies of the
occupiers forever.

Principle Five: Israel must realize that the Palestinian people are in
dire need of peace (more so than any other people in the world) and that
their decision in this regard was a strategic decision and not one
forced upon them. Even if there is at times political or even military
confrontation against the occupation, we continue to recognize--at a
very high price, I might add--that peace and coexistence in the
two-state framework on the land of historic Palestine is the final
solution. It is not some kind of stage, but a historic ending.

Will Israel accept this solution? That is what must be proven now, since
Israel has not yet declared the abandonment of its overall aspirations
towards domination. It certainly has not declared the abandonment of its
occupation of the Palestinian people and their land. Israel remains a
state that has not yet defined what it wants from the region in which it
lives.

Therefore, is Sharon and his government or even the next government
capable of formulating a "strategic political vision" for a real peace?
Is Israel, as a society, prepared for this vision? The answer is clearly
"no."

Current Israeli leaders are presenting us with their agenda. In short,
they are telling us: "The Palestinian people have no hope of seeing an
end to the occupation of their land taken in 1967. There is no way that
you will see Arab Jerusalem as part of your national soil. You will not
see, during our government or the next, the dismantling of Israeli
settlements on your land. In addition to all this, you can forget
forever any just solution to the refugee problem." These are the
components of the "Israeli vision" for a political solution.

In tandem with this vision, the current Sharon-led government is
demonstrating its own political inventions by destroying the national
integrity of the Palestinian people and the cohesive Palestinian
identity. If we reject these measures, we are accused of being
"terrorists" and sometimes "anti-Semites." The Zionist jargon of this
government says, "You must accept what I want."

If we do not accept the occupation, they say that we want to destroy
Israel. If we do not accept the annexation of Jerusalem in its entirety,
it means that we are denying their religious beliefs. If we do not
accept their settlements inside our occupied land, they consider this a
denial of their history. And if we do not accept their terror and
killing of our people, then we are denying them the right to "defend"
themselves.

This is the broken record. Even so, we have not lost our faith in peace.
We will fight in every way alongside each Israeli who wishes to live on
the principles of real peace. We must work towards peace, despite that
we cannot envision its birth under the likes of the current Israeli
leadership.

But how long will this take? It requires action and wisdom. Neither we
nor they have any other choice. We demand a political solution, not its
mirage. The starting point is to rehabilitate peace and its
infrastructure.

