There is no question that Palestinians and Israel desperately need a
meaningful third party intervention strong enough to make visible
changes on the ground. The two-state solution is continuously being
threatened by Israel's incessant settlement construction and so-called
"security fence" designed to imprison the entire Palestinian population.
At the same time, violence aimed at Israelis undoubtedly continues to
threaten Palestinian realization of freedom and independence. While
putting an end to violence against Israeli civilians and securing
Palestinian freedom and independence are two different goals, they are
so interconnected that the vehicle needed to achieve them is one. Over
the last two years, many have called for an "observer mission" or
"protection force," while others have suggested establishing a
"protectorate" or "trusteeship", at times using the terms
interchangeably without fully understanding their implications.

Observers can only do one thing: observe. They do not have the
capability to enforce political agreements. Their only task is to report
on violations. The Temporary International Presence in Hebron is the
perfect example, but clearly not the perfect model. Following the
massacre of 29 Palestinians in Hebron, TIPH placed international
observers in specified locations in Hebron to monitor events and report
back to their member states on incidents that violate the provisions of
Palestinian-Israelis agreements. Confidential reports are sent to
contributing states--far from the scene--and ultimately enter a black
hole, producing nothing. Given the intensity of this conflict and the
corresponding lack of trust, monitors will only preserve the status quo
rather than change it.

On the other hand, deployment of armed forces as part of "trusteeship"
or "protectorate", as some have proposed, is a non-starter. These models
assume the total collapse of all Palestinian institutions, including the
Palestine Liberation Organization. While the mandate may attempt to
establish a transitional government and seek to disarm Palestinian armed
activists, intervention will not be supported by the masses and many may
even resist it. As such, detractors envision Somalia all over again,
whereby the perceptions and attitudes of those deployed do not
necessarily reflect the concerns of the local population. The
consequences were disastrous then and, if applied here, will be equally
disastrous.

If the mandate for intervention is not precise or fails to address the
root causes and concerns of both sides, any type of deployment--military
or otherwise--will be rendered useless and counterproductive. As such,
intervention in the context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict requires
three important elements: a political initiative backed and supported by
continuous international political capital, political will at the local
level and a robust monitoring mechanism capable of verifying
implementation and resolving disputes in an expeditious manner. At
present, it is clear that the first element has been secured, or at
least for the time being. With the roadmap's
                                                 imminent publication,
it is hoped that the presence of a strong monitoring mechanism to ensure
effective implementation will encourage and foster political will at the
local level.

We have learned that the parties' most persistent quarrels have centered
on the failure to abide by past agreements. Indeed, the absence of an
international monitoring and implementation mechanism during the Oslo
period clearly resulted in disagreements. Such disputes could have been
circumvented if an effective implementation and monitoring mechanism had
been in place. It has become abundantly clear that both parties will
need the engagement of the international community in order to
effectively address their concerns. Without a strong enforcement
mechanism, the roadmap will soon be rendered irrelevant and the power
imbalance that exists will be perpetuated. It is clear that
international intervention must ultimately have two main goals: the
first is to ensure that Israel has the security it requires and, second,
to establish a viable, prosperous Palestinian state in the West Bank and
Gaza, including East Jerusalem, living in peace side by side with Israel.

Palestinians and Israelis alike are particularly worried that if this
process stalls or if a minor dispute turns into a major dispute it will
result in a terminal blow to the roadmap itself, or any future attempt
at resolving the conflict. Palestinians have now gone far in
implementing nearly all of the provisions of "phase 1" of the roadmap,
even before the document's final issuance. The international community
must exert maximum political capital to compel and encourage Israel to
begin implementing its obligations, as well.

The monitoring mechanism that is put in place must be detailed and clear
in order to facilitate implementation. Vagueness will only delay it, and
if that delay becomes extensive, the roadmap will become irrelevant.
Even though the Government of Israel may not currently have the
political will to freeze settlement construction, a monitoring mechanism
should ensure that the roadmap moves forward. In the end, the rewards of
a robust monitoring and enforcement mechanism will hopefully break the
cycle of failure and ensure that peace between the Palestinians and
Israel is achieved and maintained.

