Any discussion of violence and non-violence in the Israeli-Palestinian
context encounters a serious problem of definition of terms.

First, each side apparently understands its use of violence as a
reaction to the violence of the other. In this regard, while Israelis
and Palestinians generally agree on a definition of Palestinian
violence--from low level stone throwing to suicide
bombings--Palestinians define Israeli "violence" in a unique way:
occupation, settlement construction, closures, and curfews are
"violence", regardless of how and why they came about or whether bullets
are fired or people injured.

This brings us to the issue of moral equivalency. In Palestinian eyes,
the inadvertent killing by Israeli forces of Palestinian
civilians--usually in the course of shooting at Palestinian
terrorists--is considered no different at the moral and ethical level
than the deliberate targeting of Israeli civilians by Palestinian
suicide bombers. While the shockingly high numbers of Palestinian
civilians killed during the past two years undoubtedly, in some cases,
reflect poor judgment or lax discipline on the part of some Israeli
troops, in Palestinian eyes there is no grey area here: all violence is
equivalent, whatever the motive and backdrop.

This is one reason why recent Palestinian attempts to project a campaign
of selective non-violence are so intriguing. If all violence is
equivalent--if a Palestinian civilian killed accidentally because
terrorists were using his home as their base is in the same category as
an Israeli civilian deliberately targeted in a cafe by a suicide
bomber--then why do Palestinians propose only ceasing Palestinian
attacks inside pre-1967 Israel, or stopping only suicide bombings but
continuing drive-by shootings? Moreover, when Palestinians advocate
stopping suicide bombings because they "do not help our cause" (indeed,
they do not) rather than because they are morally repugnant or, say,
violate religious precepts concerning the sanctity of life--then we are
dealing with "non-violence" at a philosophical level quite different
from the precepts of a Gandhi or a Martin Luther King, who believed
(correctly) that by placing themselves as non-violent actors on a higher
moral plane than a "civilized" enemy, they could oblige it to
acknowledge their basic human and national rights.

Were the Palestinian people to adopt the Gandhian approach, Israelis
would, in the long run, show greater respect for those rights. True,
Palestinians would have to absorb some initial losses, just as the
Indians opposing the British and the blacks in the American south
continued to bear the brunt of violent police responses during an
interim period. But Israelis and their supporters abroad would get the
message rather quickly. Recent instances of mass defiance of curfews in
West Bank cities, in which Israeli soldiers "backed off", are a step in
this direction.

Yet overall, a total Palestinian switch to non-violence is a doubtful
prospect. At the societal level it is unlikely that the Palestinian
mothers who celebrate the martyrdom of their children in suicide attacks
against Israelis, are candidates for genuine non-violent resistance. At
the political level we must ask what has to happen for a society that
has achieved virtually nothing through violence for over 70 years, in
the course of which it squandered endless opportunities for compromise
and coexistence, from British partition plans in the 1930s through the
1947 UN partition plan and two "Camp Davids"--to change its mind.

Perhaps the most depressing indicator of the Palestinian approach to
violence and non-violence is provided by the arguments of the
Palestinian "reform" movement regarding the abject failure of the
Palestinian armed forces. According to the reformers these forces, which
were originally armed and sanctioned by Israel, disappointed Palestinian
society not because they failed to apprehend Palestinian terrorists who
were attacking Israelis, but because they failed to defend Palestinians
against Israelis. Reforms, such as consolidating 12 disparate security
organizations into three or four, are intended by nearly all
Palestinians to enhance their self defense capacity against the Israel
Defense Forces, rather than their capacity to prevent Palestinian violence.

This is not to argue that Palestinians don't have the right to personal
and societal security, but rather that experience should have taught
them long ago that they have no hope whatsoever of achieving that
security by challenging Israel through violence, i.e., by endangering
Israeli security, and that reliance on a small force designed somehow to
deter or delay a military response to terrorism by a military power like
Israel is the worst of all possible solutions. On the contrary,
Palestinians' best hope lies in a negotiated peace agreement that offers
them strong international security guarantees for a genuinely
demilitarized Palestine (only law enforcement units) to balance its
inevitable geostrategic dependency on Israel, Jordan and Egypt with
their far greater military capacities.

