It did not escape the attention of Palestinian analysts and politicians
that in her recent visit to Palestine and Israel, new US Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice did not refer to the roadmap in any of her public
statements and comments.

To many, this confirms suspicions about the seriousness of the US in
pursuing the roadmap as a viable plan to help the two parties replace
the continuing violent confrontations with peaceful negotiations on the
basis of international legality. These suspicions originate with the 14
amendments with which the Israeli leadership, never enthusiastic or
excited about the roadmap, conditioned its acceptance of the plan.
Israel wants to avoid certain obligations stipulated in the roadmap,
including some in its first phase.

But the roadmap is still the most workable plan to deal with the
conflict for three reasons: It's the only plan accepted in principle by
both sides, it enjoys international consensus, and it has become part of
international legality.

The first phase of the roadmap is able to meet almost all the legitimate
needs of the two parties. It addresses all immediate Israeli concerns
including ending Palestinian violence, disarming Palestinian armed
groups and dismantling organizations involved in the violent
confrontations. It also addresses all immediate Palestinian concerns
including ending Israeli attacks on Palestinians, ending the Israeli
military presence in Palestinian Authority areas, ending Israeli
restrictions on Palestinian movement and ending illegal settlement
expansions.

Phase I of the roadmap is essentially a stabilizing package to help us
cross the critical path between violence and negotiations. The main
danger to this package, however, is repeated Israeli efforts to try to
deal with the different components of this phase in a selective way.

Currently, these efforts are in evidence in the attempt to restrict the
forthcoming summit in Sharm Al Sheikh to security issues. If successful,
Palestinian efforts at returning to negotiations and solidifying the
current calm as well as the heavy diplomatic traffic to the Middle East,
reflecting a genuine international concern about the necessity of
seizing the present opportunity, will be in vain. The ceasefire cannot
be sustained unless it is consolidated by also applying the non-security
components of phase I.

This point is critical, because if the security issue is dealt with in
isolation, the causes of the lack of security, i.e., the belligerent
military occupation and practices resulting from that occupation, will
not be addressed. The international community, particularly the US, is
called upon to try to avoid that scenario. It is a prescription for
failure that will result in a great deal of disappointment among the
peoples of the region and might take us back into a deeper and wider
vicious cycle of violence as the anti-peace process factions in
Palestine turn around and say, "you got another chance and it didn't work."

Although the first phase of the roadmap is critical because its function
is to end the confrontations and restart negotiations, it cannot be
separated from the rest of the plan. Here is another pitfall. Looking
carefully at certain recent statements and practices of Israeli
politicians leads one to expect an ambush of the roadmap's phase II.
This phase calls for the establishment of a Palestinian state within
temporary borders. If the Israeli right is to be believed, it is a stage
that Israel would try to extend into a final arrangement to avoid the
third and final phase of the roadmap, which stipulates the necessity of
ending the occupation that started in 1967 to allow the establishment of
an independent Palestinian state.

This final phase, particularly ending the occupation, is of course the
most critical aspect of the roadmap, and will make or break a final,
comprehensive and lasting peace between the two sides. The roadmap is an
integral plan, and it needs the continuous and active attention of the
international community to guarantee adherence to all of its three
phases and their different components by the two parties.

