The two state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has had a
rocky history. And it may not be the dominant frame of reference for
much longer.

A two state solution was the wish of the United Nations when, in 1947,
it voted (with the Arab bloc voting against) to partition Mandatory
Palestine between a Jewish state and an Arab state. David Ben-Gurion
galvanized a small majority within Zionist institutions to accept the
partition idea.

Until the 1970s the Palestinian national movement, which rejected that
solution, demanded the establishment of a single Palestinian state in
which Israel's veteran Jewish population would be allowed to continue to
live. Israelis, understandably, viewed this as a decidedly "Arab"
solution wherein Jews would become at best a persecuted minority. The
Palestine Liberation Organization only moved toward acceptance of a
two-state solution after Israel had occupied the West Bank and Gaza
Strip in 1967. This took place at about the same time that the Israeli
mainstream sought a repartition agreement with Jordan that would
eliminate the possibility of a Palestinian state, and Israeli settlement
activity signaled the emergence in Israel of schools of thought that
contemplated holding onto all or part of these territories.

Despite former prime minister Menachem Begin's apparent readiness in
1978 to establish a Palestinian autonomy that might eventually become a
state, the Israeli mainstream only began seriously contemplating a two
state solution with the outbreak of the first intifada in late 1987,
which signaled that Palestinians would not tolerate open-ended Israeli
occupation. The two state theme drew strength from the Oslo agreement of
1993, to the point where Israelis on the Right, such as Ariel Sharon, as
well as the Left, accepted the eventual emergence of a Palestinian state
alongside Israel. Perhaps the crowning achievements of this movement are
the recent United Nations Security Council Resolution 1397 and Arab
League adoption of the Saudi proposal, accompanied by statements by
United States President Bush--all establishing a two-state solution as
the goal of an Israeli-Palestinian peace process.

Hence from an historic standpoint it is ironic that at this very apogee
of international support for a two state solution we are also witnessing
the reemergence of the single Palestinian state solution as a possible
preferred Palestinian option. As Arab affairs commentator Patrick Seale
stated recently, "the truth is that the two-state solution is receding
fast." This is happening because of unprecedented Palestinian population
growth, coupled with the folly of Israeli settlement and the hardening
of both Israeli and Palestinian peace conditions in the shadow of the
intifada.

The Palestinian Arab population of the Gaza Strip, for example, is
growing at a rate exceeding 5 percent annually. In the entire world this
pace is exceeded only by the Bedouin population of the Israeli Negev.
Consequently reliable demographic estimates hold that within a decade
Israeli Jews will be a minority, and Palestinian Arabs a majority,
between the Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan River. In parallel, Israeli
settlements, both "legal" (under Israeli law) and illegal, continue to
spread throughout the West Bank, with exclusive roads to service them
and large contingents of military forces to protect them. The deployment
of settlements throughout the West Bank will soon make it difficult for
anyone to envision removing a tolerable portion of the settlements and
repartitioning Palestine between two states, somewhere near the 1967
Green Line borders. And the absence of a realistic Israeli peace policy
at the government level means that even the vision of an acceptable two
state solution is no longer held out to the other side.

Palestinians, too, are gradually removing their support from the two
state idea. The positions evinced by Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat
since Camp David regarding the need for Israeli acceptance in some form
of the refugees' right of return and the absence of a legitimate Jewish
claim to "roots" on the Temple Mount, point to the difficulty he has in
coming to terms with the Jews' claim to nationhood in their historic
homeland. Note that he has ceased threatening, since then, to declare a
separate state by a given deadline. Palestinian polls show that the
current intifada is increasingly identified by Palestinians as aimed at
liberating all of Palestine, not just the West Bank and Gaza. And the
political leadership of Israeli (Palestinian) Arabs insists that Israel
has to become a "state of all its citizens" rather than a Jewish Zionist
state with an Arab minority.

If there is one idea that unites the large majority of Israel's divisive
Jewish population it is the notion that Israel must be a Jewish,
democratic state. If, indeed, the prospects for a reasonable two state
solution are beginning to fade; if a new Palestinian leadership with
more moderate policy ideas is not about to appear; if the Israeli
political establishment, led by the nose by a minority of extremist and
highly dedicated settlers, does not soon change its approach; if
forceful outside intervention by the US remains unlikely--then the best
hope for the Israeli mainstream to avoid the South Africanization of the
conflict is to take matters into its own hands and demand unilateral
redeployment and separation, including dismantling the isolated
settlements that perpetuate Israeli rule over Palestinians. This may be
the only way left to realize the single basic condition that precedes
all other conditions of our existence: a Jewish, democratic
state.

