Q: When you remember the time that you spent negotiating
the Oslo accords                                            , do you
remember it fondly, or is it troubling?

A: This is an experience that I am not totally happy with and
also not totally unhappy with. After many years of total Israeli
blockade on the recognition of Palestinian rights, to come
forward--regardless of how--and sit on the other side of the table and
start talking with the Palestinians about their rights and aspirations
was in itself a serious undertaking, one we got into hoping that we
would eventually come to everlasting peace.

Of course, during the negotiations, we had many ups and downs because on
the one hand, so many "trivial" issues (from the Palestinian
perspective) were met with total Israeli denial. We realized that the
Israelis were able to stall the negotiations and delay a lot of
progress, just because they are the mighty power and we are a very weak
partner.

On the other hand, we came to know more of the worries of the Israeli
side, their aspirations for the future, and we managed to pass on to the
Israelis the kind of aspirations that we have for our people and the
fact that the Palestinians are equally worthy of a state on their own
soil, after all.

Q: Can you give an example of one of these "trivial" issues?

A: For example, as far as the Palestinians are concerned,
historic Palestine is Palestinian territory. For us and the Israelis to
spend so much time discussing whether we have legitimate rights in the
West Bank and Gaza, including Jerusalem, from our perspective was a very
trivial thing. From the Israeli perspective, on the other hand, it was
negotiable. Whenever they questioned the content of [United Nations
Resolution] 242, whenever they tried to deny it or give a special
explanation to 242, it was for us a triviality used by the Israelis to
stall the negotiations.

But we also came to know many Israeli negotiators who, on a personal
level, were understanding and maybe in agreement with our aspirations,
but on an official level were not able to even come close to recognizing
Palestinian aspirations.

Q: It is now ten years later and in many respects Oslo has
been voided. What achievements do Palestinians still cling to?

A: The fact that we are no longer discussing whether or not
we have legitimate rights, the international consensus that there is a
need for a Palestinian state--although with some requirements--are both
direct results of Oslo. Some of the relationships that the Palestine
Liberation Organization had with some members of the international
community were very much conditional, compared to today when members of
the international community deal with us on almost equal footing.

Q: In hindsight, what aspects of the accords have proven to
be disastrous?

A: There is one fundamental aspect: the fact that the Oslo
agreement was based on the principle of good will and good performance.
The Palestinians didn't perform well in terms of realization of the Oslo
agreement vis-a-vis their entity and also, the transitional aspect of
the agreement has proved to be very seriously defective because there
was a lot of bad faith.

I think that the agreement was fully dependent on the good faith of both
sides. Each side had its own clock in terms of how to deal with the
agreement and the applications of the agreement. When it came to
reality, we realized that these expectations and modalities were not
necessarily based on good faith.

Q: If Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin had not been
killed, would it have worked?

A: I think the difference between Rabin and the rest of the
Israeli leadership was that he had a fundamental change of direction
vis-a-vis his perception of the Israeli-Palestinian relationship. He was
keen on reaching some kind of an arrangement that would be acceptable to
Israelis with minimum harm, and that would be able to provide the
Palestinians with the minimum requirements for establishing a state. I
cannot say that if he had not been killed, the situation would be
fundamentally different. I think that each side had theorized a
compromising situation that was not close enough to the other sides?.

Even with Rabin, we would have had problems, but at least the
Rabin-Arafat relationship was a little more frank and candid. They could
have avoided some of the mishaps that we are seeing now.

Q: How would you say that the Oslo accords altered the way
that Palestinians think about themselves?

A: First of all, before the Oslo agreement, we knew very
little about what we could really reach with the Israelis. We had the
[UN] resolution; the resolution has some very theoretical strategic
goals that it wants to achieve.

Suddenly, out of the blue, we have come to realize that an agreement
will definitely test what constitutes the Palestinian population. It
introduced, probably for the first time, the very real challenge of
looking for a potential solution to the refugee issue. The Palestinians
have started to realize that the Palestinian state will be a state of
the population of the West Bank and Gaza, with some arrangements for the
diaspora. The Palestinians, for the first time, have started to look
inward to see what compromises they will have to make concerning the
rest of the [issues] that have been postponed.

This is why I think that the Oslo agreement has presented a very serious
challenge to the Palestinians in terms of settling some questions that
they have avoided: concerning their identity, their relationship to
Palestinians outside Palestine, their relationship to Israeli
Palestinians in Israel and so on.

Q: Palestinians often give their prescription for a real
return to negotiations: Israel's demonstration of intent through troop
withdrawals and a prisoner release and a halt in settlement
construction. But in your mind, how can Palestinians contribute to that
transformation of Israeli society? Or can they only wait?

A: Palestinians are committing one of their biggest mistakes
in not reaching out to Israeli public opinion. I think the Palestinians
have a very serious and just cause, but the problem is that they are not
demonstrating to the Israeli public, through various mediums, that they
mean business and that they have produced the historic compromise of
accepting Israel as a neighbor and that much of the violence and
fundamentalism that is taking place is due to the harsh realities within
Palestinian society and economy and the harsh treatment by the Israeli
military of the Palestinian population.

The Israelis have consistently failed to realize that the Palestinians'
experience with Israelis is always one of shame and humiliation. The
Palestinians' first-hand experience with an Israeli is either with
settlers or jailers or army officers or employers in Israel. In all
these cases, there is a huge inequality in terms of treatment. This is
true for the Israelis, too; they typically see a Palestinian in the form
of a terrorist or a suicide bomber.

The Palestinians haven't had their big leap forward in reaching out to
Israeli society, and Israelis have not worked hard enough to earn the
privilege of being a good neighbor to the Palestinians.

