Q: What do you see as the way out of this crisis situation?

A: The only way is to withdraw the Israeli military forces that
have occupied the Palestinian cities of the West Bank. When the
withdrawal is competed and when there is the chance to sit and
negotiate, we need to have international protection. We cannot negotiate
under the threat of Israeli tanks and artillery and airplanes; we cannot
negotiate under threat of the renewal of occupation at any moment. There
is a need for international protection. We are asking for it, we are in
need of it and it is an essential part of the negotiations process.

Q: Do you see this coming from the American administration?

A: I think that the international protection should come not
only from the Americans, but from the United Nations, Russia and the
European Union.

Q: There are some who say that the United States' reputation
has been so damaged in Arab eyes that it cannot be involved.

A: I think that the United States has destroyed its credibility
in the Arab world for a very long time. It cannot regain this
credibility unless it starts taking a position that departs from
complete support of [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon's policy of
Israeli war against the Palestinian people and of Israeli occupation of
the Palestinian Authority areas.

Every time we started implementing the Tenet Plan, for example, which is
originally an American plan (all the plans are American plans), the
American administration tends to explain these plans according to the
Israeli interpretation. In Tenet, we refused from the beginning the
condition of seven days without any incident. But the Americans accepted
it and this gave Sharon months of continuing violence against the
Palestinian people, under the pretext that there had not been seven days
of non-violence.

We don't want to have hostile relations with the United States. On the
contrary, we were among the first in the Arab world who condemned the
attacks of September 11, we were the first in the Arab world who said to
Bin Ladin, "You cannot use the Palestinian cause and you do not
represent Palestinian aspirations." We were the first in the Arab world
to say that terrorism is not the way to help the just causes of the Arab
states, whether they be national, political or social. But these
positions were not taken into consideration.

On the contrary, the United States has increasingly adopted Israeli
conditions. The Americans themselves say they know that these conditions
are impossible to implement. But they accepted some of them and wanted
us to accept them even though [they knew] that Sharon was playing a game
and asking the US to pressure us.

Q: It has been said that all of this has happened because the
Palestinians were not willing to accept the Zinni paper.

A: Well, look at that paper and you will see why we don't
accept it. In that paper, there are parts and phrases that if we accept
them, we will have to accept what the Israelis are doing now to our
people. We would have to accept the incursions and attacks under the
pretext that this is [Israeli] self-defense to counter imminent
so-called terrorist attacks against Israel.

This paper added a phrase that was not originally in the Tenet plan, and
which contradicts the Tenet plan completely--that Israel will not make
incursions in the Palestinian Authority areas, unless they are in
self-defense or against imminent attacks. Who will interpret this? Of
course, the Israelis, who will consider every attack as self-defense and
say that they have information that a terrorist attack is imminent.

If we accepted this, we would be worse than [South Lebanese Army
commander] Antoin Lahad--not only an agent, but an accomplice with the
Israelis against our own people. The Israelis knew that it would be
impossible for us to accept such conditions and the Americans, either
with goodwill or full knowledge, fell into that trap.

Q: What about the Saudi proposal?

A: The Saudi proposal represents our policy. We have said from
the beginning that we want normalization of relations between the
countries of the region, but on the basis of international resolutions,
especially 224 and 338, and the establishment of an independent
Palestinian state within the borders of June 4, 1967 including East
Jerusalem.

This is our policy, in spite of the current difficult moment, in spite
of the bloodshed, the war crimes against our people, in spite of the
destruction we are facing in our cities and infrastructure, in spite of
the Israelis killing hundreds and injuring thousands and despite that
their army has entered every ministry and Palestinian institution.
Nobody should believe that they are targeting terrorism. They targeted
those who made peace with them and without whom there would be no peace:
the Palestinian Authority and the Palestinian leadership.

For Sharon, the enemy is not terrorism, the enemy is peace. The
representative of peace on the Palestinian side is the Palestinian
Authority and its institutions. That is why they targeted them and did
great damage to the security services--the same security services that
the Americans are asking to control violence and put an end to the
situation.

They have created an atmosphere of utmost nationalist hatred among the
Israeli people against the Palestinian people and some of our extremists
helped them in doing this through the suicide attacks, which we condemn
and do not represent us, nor the Palestinian people. These have been
used to destroy the bridges of peace and to create channels of blood
between us. We believe that peace will be the future. The enemies of
peace, those who are ruling in Israel, will be defeated.

