The concept of "separation" is understood in a myriad of different ways
in the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In Israel, the idea is debated by
the public after each wave of Palestinian attacks inside Israel; it is a
knee-jerk response to the experience of anguish.

Palestinians, on the other hand, have long been unified over the idea
that "separation" must mean the dismantling of the Israeli occupation
and all its interferences into Palestinian daily life. This requires
that Israel leave the Palestinian occupied territories by mutually
signed agreement, thus ensuring an independent Palestinian state within
the borders of 1967, including Gaza, the West Bank and East Jerusalem.
It also means that relations between the two sides will be based on
equality, taking into consideration the interests of each with no
domination of one over the other. This concept of separation would allow
Palestinians to establish foreign and economic relations with other
states on the basis of their specific needs. It would also mandate
control over Palestine's borders and movement in and out of those
borders between Palestine and any other country that Palestinians wish
to establish relations with.

While the concept of separation in Israel varies from one political camp
to another, in general it is defined by the creation of systems that
prevent Palestinians from entering Israel while allowing the Israeli
military and settlers to enter Palestine at whim. Of course, the Israeli
mainstream differs over the path of the line that should separate the
two sides, as well as the level of control that is maintained. But
nearly all of these advocates base their desire for separation solely on
one-way traffic and the ultimate strategic goal of domination.

A minority in Israel made up of Peace Now and those to its left base
their concept of separation on international law and norms, including a
complete end to the occupation, and their understanding intersects with
Palestinian goals. These groups are marginal, however, and apply little
weight in the political balance of power in Israel.

It is understandable then, that Palestinians are generally mistrustful
of Israeli intentions in calling for separation. They see in it an
attempt to rearrange the occupation in a manner that is more comfortable
for the occupier and more difficult to resist. Nothing better
illustrates this facade than the wall, falsely presented by Israel as
the physical embodiment of benign "separation." First, the course of the
wall falls not on Israel's recognized borders but inside the occupied
territories, thus implementing another illegal confiscation of
Palestinian land. Second, the wall prevents Palestinians from leaving
towns and villages now encircled by razor wire, ditches, electronic
fencing and cement walls at the same time that Israel's settlers,
soldiers and military aircraft have free access over, above, and among
Palestinians inside those barriers. Finally, the wall allows Israel to
contain the Palestinians, not only preventing their movement into Israel
but also preventing their movement to other countries (and preventing
others from visiting them).

Thus, the Palestinian feeling is that the notion of separation is
deceptive and manipulated for Israel's use. A strategy based on this
concept is not going to bring either side any nearer to a just and
lasting peace. Separation based on a complete end to the occupation, on
the other hand, and which gives birth to a viable and independent
Palestinian state with the same rights as Israel, is the only solution
that will ensure the peace and security both sides crave.

