Q: Do you believe in solving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict
by establishing one secular, democratic state?

A: Ideally, yes. I believed in a one-state solution because I do
not think that religious beliefs can constitute legitimacy for any kind
of political state. All along, that is why the Palestinians refused the
partition scheme.

But now we are at this stage in history. I feel that once the United
Nations was conceived and established as a haven for the oppressed and a
safeguard for injustice everywhere and as a venue for resolving
conflict, this became the most legitimate forum for resolving our
problem. I therefore believe that the next step should be a two-state
solution based on all the relevant United Nations resolutions. All of them.

Whether these states will eventually become one, nobody knows. I am
talking about the resolution at this time in the history of the
Palestinian question.

Q: Has the intifada changed your views on this in anyway?

A: The intifada has actually reaffirmed my conviction that the
Palestinian people will never remain still until their rights are
restored. The question is not merely a matter of state or statehood.
Statehood is a culmination of a restoration and recognition of
Palestinian rights.

The Palestinian right of return, self-determination, rights to
compensation for the pains--there are so many rights that have been
totally ignored. Once these rights have been confirmed, restored and
recognized, then naturally we are going to have a state because
self-determination is one of these rights. The question is, of course,
how and when.

This is something that I would like to emphasize. Negotiations have been
taking place, but one does not negotiate over rights. One negotiates
over means and timetables. That's it. Once these inalienable rights are
recognized, then we start coming to the negotiating table.

Q: How can Palestinians make this happen?

A: Now we are entering a very low ebb in our struggle. The Israeli
military machinery, the American machinery, overwhelm us.

Maybe we will not be able to achieve anything now, but we should be
visionary about whatever solution we are going to have. The power of the
masses is sometimes much stronger than military power because it is more
legitimate. It emanates from conviction and belief and has deeply
imbedded historical roots.

If oppressive powers continue to really undermine human values and
principles of justice, they will be isolated. I probably will not see
that happen during my lifetime, but I have faith in the future.

Q: Right now, due to the Israeli closure, families are
divided. In a short while, people from Gaza won't even know Palestinians
from the West Bank. These are now facts. How do Palestinians get past
those things?

A: By sheer resilience, endurance, solidarity and a staunch belief
in the eventual victory of justice. I hope that there are voices inside
Israel that will realize that this is very detrimental to the future.
And I hope that the world will wake up one day and concentrate on the
basic issue of occupation, and not on side issues. All of these issues
emanate from the occupation and the dispossession of the Palestinians.
The problem did not start in 1967, mind you, it started in 1948. Half of
the Palestinian people are out of Palestine. Do these people not exist?

Israel is trying to create facts on the ground using the most oppressive
means in the hope that we will start licking the bone they are throwing
us. We are not asking for charity. We are not a people--as Mr. Bush
says--who need a better life away from our day-to-day problems. If our
rights are restored, we do not need anyone's charity.

We have our land, we have our human resources, we are enterprising
people, we have been building our country despite all hardships and
obstacles. There is no horizon for anything at this moment, but I always
believe in miracles. I always believe that out of this darkness a flash
of light will come and shake the whole world into awareness of what is
taking place.

If you are going to ask me now what I see for the next year, I don't
know. What is happening is surreal. And what is worse is that the whole
world is watching in silence. What they are talking about--reforms?
Democracy? What is this nonsense? Is this democracy when the United
States is interfering in our leadership? Is it not corruption when
congressmen are being bought by various lobbies in the United States?

The most important thing is to end the occupation and liberate
Palestinian land from settlements. We can't even breath. Even at the
peak of the peace process, the first thing that they did was to isolate
Jerusalem and Gaza from the West Bank. Gradually we became cantons here
and there. So it was a process of dispossession, not a peace process.
And fait accompli established by aggression and oppression and state
terrorism.

Q: Is it correct to say that the restoration of Palestinian
rights means that Israel will no longer be a Jewish state?

A: They planted themselves in our land. If they had their own land
that they had not confiscated from us, and they wanted it to be Jewish
or Muslim or Buddhist, I would not care less. But they have taken our
land and whether their state is Jewish or otherwise is not my concern.

What is happening is like a fire consuming everybody in the area. We who
have lived on this land and seen the suffering of the people, we have
seen the fire of Israeli aggression consuming the self. I wish they
would wake up to what is taking place. I wish they had the wisdom to
stop and look deep within themselves to recognize the historic crime
they committed against the Palestinians. This should be the starting
point.

