Three almost-simultaneous events--the reelection of George W. Bush, the
demise of Yasser Arafat, and the Knesset passage of Ariel Sharon's
disengagement plan--provide a stellar opportunity for advancing Middle
East policy not seen since the American victories in the Cold War and
the Gulf War in 1991. The new constellation of events brings us full
circle, since the last one resulted in the mistaken bet on Arafat,
through Oslo, as the founder of a Palestinian state-in-the-making.

The last order, that of relying upon Arafat to take Palestinians to
their "promised land", collapsed when Arafat turned down the state
offered to him at Camp David and launched a terror war against Israel.
That war was itself discredited by the attacks of September 11, which
created a global divide between states and entities that support
terrorism, on the one hand, and their victims, led by the United States
(and Israel), on the other.

In June 2002, Bush applied the new global order to the Arab-Israel
conflict when he called on the Palestinians to "elect new leaders,
leaders not compromised by terror". Bush simultaneously deepened the
American commitment to Palestinian statehood while, for the first time,
making that commitment contingent on Palestinian actions--democratic
reforms and ending terrorism.

Unlike in Afghanistan and Iraq, the US did not set about trying to make
regime change happen, and may or may not have prevented Israel from
doing so. The result was a stalemate in which all there was to do was
wait for Arafat to leave the scene, one way or another. Now he has.

Initially, the old adage, "if you don't know what to do, do what you
know", is likely to hold sway. This means attempting to revive the
frozen American-European roadmap. But if new/old leaders maintain
Arafat's refusal to use the ample political and military forces at their
disposal to combat terror, the roadmap will remain as stuck as it ever was.

Rather than follow the roadmap into the same old dead end, it would
behoove the parties to take this moment to think slightly out of the
box. For the Palestinians, this would begin with absorbing the wider
context.

As far as Bush is concerned, America has much bigger fish to fry than
forcing the Palestinians to accept a state that, under Arafat, they did
not want and wouldn't take action to bring about. Unlike his
predecessor, Bush does not believe that transformation of the region
revolves around the Arab-Israel conflict, but the opposite. It is now
obvious that Bush and even Sharon believe in a genuine two-state
solution more than Arafat ever did, but they are content to wait until
there is a Palestinian leadership that believes in one as well.

The main litmus test for Palestinian seriousness on this score is not
just the abandonment of terrorism, but of the "one state solution", also
known as the "right of return". When a Palestinian leadership abandons
the challenge to Israeli sovereignty posed by the Palestinian claim of
the right to live in Israel, the conflict will, in principle, be over.
Ami Ayalon and Sari Nusseibeh have (unlike the "Geneva Accord") already
provided such a formula: "Palestinian refugees will return only to the
State of Palestine; Jews will return only to the State of Israel".

Regardless of what Sharon says, disengagement and perhaps even the
completion of the security fence will in fact be entirely tied to
Palestinian actions. So if a Palestinian leadership wants to stop these
unilateral Israeli actions, it has the power to do so by taking the
steps that would make a negotiating track desirable and irresistible.

The tactical challenge for the international community, including the
Bush administration, will be to avoid doing the Palestinian leadership
the "favor" of lowering its standards of compliance with the roadmap's
stop-terror-first sequence. This would ensure yet another Arafat-style
stalemate, not to mention the loss of more Palestinian and Israeli lives.

The strategic challenge, if the promise of this moment is to be
realized, is for the US to demand that the Arab states help pull the rug
out from under Arafat's old one-state game. This means saying out loud
that the demand of "return" to Israel won't fly because it is
inconsistent with the world's two-state vision. A good start would be
for President George W. Bush, though he has already said it once, to
repeat this principle enough to make it a central pillar of his
second-term Middle East policy.

Arafat's demise holds the promise of ending Palestinian helplessness.
The outside world can assist by saying so, and by shining a spotlight on
the root cause of the conflict: the inability of the Palestinians and
the Arab world to reject the one-state fantasy, in the form of the
assertion of an asymmetrical Palestinian "right" to immigrate to
Israel.

