Q: We have seen many meanings of "separation" in this
intifada. Can you talk some about them?

A: One that stands out was the separation plan put out by
Israeli Labor Party leaders Haim Ramon and Shlomo Ben Ami soon after
Ariel Sharon's election as prime minister, as an attempt to find an exit
strategy from the collapse of [the Oslo accords] into military carnage.
It was the plan that put separation into much greater practical
political play in Israel--but the concept was ultimately hijacked by
Sharon into a greater Israel version that we see being implemented now.

The Ramon/Ben Ami plan ironically had some very positive elements to it.
It proposed unilateral separation, not with walls, but with an
international force. Israel would get out of the majority of the
occupied territories but hand them over not to the Palestinian Authority
but to some type of an international mandate. Thus the plan could be
sold as something positive in Israeli eyes because, rather than being
rewarded with more territory, the Palestinian Authority would actually
be "punished" by not having authority over the territory that Israel
withdrew from. In addition, Israelis would not have their security put
back in Palestinian Authority hands, which by then they had lost all
trust in.

It was a very clever salable way of bringing in an international force,
which would be a positive development for Palestinians. The
international mandate would then "reform" the Palestinian Authority over
a three-year period, and bring the parties to final status issues. To
sell this under the rubric of separation was clever but it was never
taken up, not even by Labor. But I do think it set the stage for a much
wider debate within the Israeli leadership.

Q: How much is separation plausible for Palestinians?

A: If one takes a look at the wall, the first thing that one
must ask is what is being separated from what? The aim is basically to
separate us from them, not necessarily them from us.

In that sense, the wall is a much deeper, concretized form of the
process of separation that began in the Oslo years, which began to
separate Israeli and Palestinian civilians from each other. The majority
of the Palestinian population can no longer "go over" into Israel
anymore. Prior to the first Gulf War and the institution of Israel's
permit system, Palestinians went into Israel as workers, shoppers,
visitors--there was, despite the inequities of occupation, an experience
of civilian interaction.

The wall is the final barrier to this interaction between Israelis and
Palestinians as civilians. What is going to continue and even grow, on
the other hand, will be the presence of Israel's military in our lives.
It is a pipe dream that the wall and the cameras and the gates will do
all the policing. Instead, given the complex configuration of the wall,
it is likely that a much greater part of Israel's population is still
going to be interacting with Palestinians as soldiers.

Those of us who are older can remember when Palestinians and Israelis
interacted in more mundane human ways. Now I teach whole generations of
students at university who have never come into contact with Israelis
except as soldiers or settlers. This was one of the great crimes of Oslo
and it will continue to worsen.

Q: What do you see as the sociological impact of this in
the long term?

A: The wall is an attempt to put us "out of sight, out of mind."
The idea is that if one cannot see Palestinians, somehow they are not
there. But of course, we are here. We are not separated; we are just
under a new form of Israeli domination. And what this means is that even
if the majority of Israelis don't see us any more under this new form of
domination, there will continue to be a massive drain on their
resources--financially, on their moral resources, and on their moral
capital in the outside world. This kind of vicious apartheid regime is
going to cost Israel dearly both internally and internationally.
Finally, there are the long-term political costs; because the wall is an
attempt to avert finding a real solution, Israel will continue to live
in a permanent state of war.

But the wall has multiple separation aims. The other pernicious aim of
the wall is the separation of Palestinians from their land and
livelihoods; both in terms of the immediate land grabs associated with
its construction and in terms of the long-run of people being forced to
leave in an attempt to make a livelihood. This is about slow transfer
over the long run. It will not succeed, but "the long run" is quite a
while and in the meantime, it will have great destructive consequences
for Palestinian society.

Q: One of the aspects that this discussion highlights is
the success with which Israel has co-opted the language of peace.

A: Until a few months ago, one could still hear members of the
Palestinian leadership saying things like, "the wall is going to bury
the peace process." One wondered, what peace process were they talking
about? What happened in the Oslo process was that Palestinians had a
much greater stake in peace and the Palestinian leadership, in
particular, clung to the language of the peace process when it was long
gone because they drew their international legitimacy from it.

But when a situation becomes this stark, no amount of language can hide
it. Israel's use of language has become ludicrous--"targeted killings"
for example. To say "targeted assassinations" would give those killed
too much political legitimacy, in Israel's eyes. No matter how weak the
European position is, and no matter how completely hypocritical American
positions are, most people in the world see the images.

The gravest problem is that Israeli society refuses to see. Israelis are
blinded by this wall and are waiting for it to solve all their problems.
As such, the wall has bought Sharon what he most crucially wants--time.

