In June 2001, the Jerusalem Media and Communication Center published a
poll that set off alarm bells for many Israelis. An article in Ha'aretz
by analyst Ze'ev Schiff concluded that there has been a dramatic shift
and radicalization of Palestinian public opinion, and a remarkable trend
away from recognition of Israel's existence.

One year later, the same poll found that Palestinian society was exactly
split--with 51 percent of Palestinians saying that the goal of the
current Intifada was to liberate all of historic Palestine. That was up
from 43 percent twelve months earlier, and a determined about face from
1993 when 68 percent of Palestinians supported the Declaration of
Principles setting out a plan to divide historic Palestine into two states.

There is no doubt that the 20 months of fierce and bloody
Palestinian-Israeli confrontations have contributed to these changes. As
Palestinians have unified over their resistance to Israel, they have
simultaneously grown more skeptical of the peace process. But it is
important to put these changes in context.

In Palestinian political thinking, recognition of the state of
Israel--part and parcel of giving up certain Palestinian rights in
historic Palestine--and ending the Israeli occupation in order to allow
for an independent Palestinian state alongside the state of Israel, are
one complete package. The two cannot be separated; they are different
faces of the same coin.

There are several reasons behind this. First, Palestinians have no
incentives to give up their historical rights in Palestine by
recognizing Israel's right to exist if they, in return, are not granted
the right of self-determination and independence in the rest of
Palestine. Second, one of the major arguments used by the Palestinian
peace camp to convince the public to recognize Israel according to
United Nations Resolution 242 was that the only way to end the
occupation and achieve self-determination was to base the Palestinian
position upon international norms and laws. These, among other things,
include the need to recognize Israel and its right to exist.

The collapse of the peace process and the subsequent confrontations, in
addition to every single Israeli government's insistence upon expanding
Jewish settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, have weakened the
Palestinian people's hopes and expectations that the Israeli occupation
will end and an independent Palestinian state be established in
accordance with the June 4, 1967 borders as designated by international
resolutions. As a result, the Palestinian majority is no longer
convinced that it is worth recognizing Israel.

This view becomes more and more pervasive as the Israeli military and
Israeli settlements become deeply entrenched in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip. With the army roaming the streets once again, Palestinian public
opinion is also reverting.

Simultaneously, the oppressed minority of Palestinian citizens living
within Israel's borders has been radicalized by the ongoing
confrontations. The talk now common in Israel of somehow expelling or
annexing these Palestinians to the West Bank in order to defend Israel's
"Jewish character" can only further aggravate this situation.

As such, Israel can continue by virtue of force to maintain its
occupation over the Palestinian occupied territories. But this force
will never be sufficient to achieve other Israeli objectives such as
peace, security and recognition, for the simple reason that security,
peace and recognition are incompatible with occupation.

And now, as Israel puts itself more and more inside what was intended to
be the Palestinian state, it should not be surprised that Palestinians
are slowly returning the favor, reviving their claims to all of the
Palestinian land that is now Israel.

