Ten years ago, on the eve of the Oslo signing in Washington on September
13, 1993, it seems that we were all better off than we are now. The
first intifada was over. The Madrid multilateral process that linked
Israel with most of the region was developing. The Gulf war of 1991 had
ushered in an era of high profile American involvement and relative
stability; it helped bring the Palestine Liberation Organization to the
negotiating table. There were only around 120,000 settlers in the West
Bank and Gaza and that problem looked solvable.

The next two years maintained the trend. Rapid progress was made in
turning over territory to the PLO. Israel and Jordan made peace.
Israel's Arab community for the first time appeared to feel a closer
identity with the state. Peace brought economic prosperity. The
president of the United States supported the process politically,
diplomatically and financially to an unprecedented degree.

In contrast, the current situation needs little elaboration: more and
uglier violence between Israelis and Palestinians and inside Israel; an
economy in decline; greater alienation between Jews and Arabs inside
Israel; an American president whose agenda is consumed by post 9/11
issues but whose constituencies and natural inclinations apparently
preclude any serious engagement here.

The danger signs were there, of course. Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin's
parliamentary (and popular) support during the years 1993-95 was
fragile. Neither he nor his successors stopped the flow of settlers,
particularly to the West Bank. Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat continued
to make public pronouncements that called into question his commitment
to a genuine two-state solution. He imported corruption to the
Palestinian Authority. And he still viewed violence as a legitimate
means of furthering his goals.

With the passage of time, it is increasingly easy to point out the flaws
in the Oslo Declaration of Principles
                                            and resultant peace process
that contributed to this decline: over-reliance on interim phases as
confidence builders; the Israeli presumption that the PLO would and
could act as a subcontractor to root out Palestinian terrorism; the
failure to stop settlement expansion; bad leadership. Some of the
mistakes have been rectified, however painfully, over time. For example,
Israel and Palestinian contractual reliance on United Nations Security
Council Resolution 242 as the framework for final status, even though
242 was not designed as a framework for Israeli-Palestinian peace, has
been to some extent supplanted by the advent of the Clinton Principles
                                                and the Saudi/Arab
League Initiative.                                               

The consequences of Oslo's failure for the Israeli Arab community are
only now beginning to be seriously recognized. In the words of the
recently-published Orr Commission report,

/ the Oslo agreement and the establishment thereafter of the
governmental system of the Palestinian Authority accelerated yet further
[Israeli Arab] identification with the Palestinians. . . . [the Israeli
Arab sector] became aware that the Israeli-Palestinian agreements ignore
their special problems and that the concept of two states for the two
peoples leaves them to their fate. . . . the political struggles waged
by representatives of the Arab minority in the country underwent a
process of escalation. . . . Palestinian identity was no longer merely
an expression of solidarity with brothers "outside", but became the
basis for struggles "inside". /

While the Rabin government dealt forthrightly with this challenge by
encouraging greater Arab integration into the Israeli socio-economic
fabric, all of its successors neglected it--thereby helping usher in the
tragic events of October 2000, in which 12 Israeli-Arabs and one
Palestinian were killed by the Israel Police in the course of
demonstrations in support of the intifada.

As ugly as the present reality is just ten years after Oslo was signed,
and with the awareness of the inevitable mistakes that were made, we now
realize how far away we were then from a solution--but how much clearer
its outlines are now, thanks to Oslo. The absence in Oslo of clearly
enunciated parameters of final status led the parties, however
painfully, to begin to come to grips with this lacuna on their own,
without a formal process. In contrast with the vision of the Oslo
negotiators, the new outlines bespeak far more separation than
integration. The Palestinians will get something close to the 1967
lines, and a capital in Jerusalem. But there will be no return and no
right of return. And there will be a fence. If we cannot do this through
agreement, then it is imperative to invoke Israeli unilateral steps.
Beyond this, Israeli Arabs will at some point, and in some way, have to
come to terms with minority status in a democratic Jewish state.

The outlines are clearer, yet the solution may not be nearer. The past
ten years have witnessed a Palestinian demographic victory (they will
soon be a majority between the river and the sea) and Israeli geographic
preemption--the inexorable spread of the settlements. The three relevant
leaders--Arafat, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and US President
George W. Bush--have all failed to provide forthright leadership for
peace. Hence it is increasingly difficult with each passing day to make
good on the two state solution ushered in by Oslo.

Soon it will be virtually impossible.

