It would be relatively easy for Israel to destroy the military forces of
the Palestinian Authority and reconquer all the territories. Yet not
only would this not decide the conflict with the Palestinians, it would
clearly endanger Israel's very existence as a democratic country with a
solid long-term Jewish majority. Israel would again find itself ruling
over more than three million Palestinians (in addition to more than one
and a quarter million inside the state), and embroiled in an accelerated
process of losing the Jewish majority in the territories under its control.

Within about a decade the Jews will lose their majority between the
Mediterranean Sea and the Jordan River. Given this circumstance,
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat assesses that time is working in favor
of his people and there is no pressing need for a settlement. On the
contrary, in his view the absence of a settlement serves the
Palestinians' long-term interests, even if in the short-term it involves
great suffering. Hence, paradoxically, an Israeli withdrawal, separation
and the establishment of an independent Palestinian state alongside
Israel have become an overriding Israeli interest and a desired
solution--while for the Palestinians this is at best a default solution
that in any event would be received with mixed emotions and a sense of
historic loss.

The Israeli-Palestinian confrontation differs from the Israel-Arab
inter-state conflict in several critical senses. One of these emerges
from the political connotations of communal identity. The sharp defeat
that Israel administered in 1967 to the Arabs, led by Abd al-Nasser, was
more than a typical military setback. The Six-Day War led to the demise
of the ideas that Nasser personified, and at their center his messianic
pan-Arab message. In parallel, the territorial Arab state became
institutionalized and even reinforced its public legitimacy. Arab
politics became more pragmatic, with the Arab states seeking to ensure
their particularistic political interests without ideological trappings.
The Arab states bordering on Israel have no interest in waging a
perpetual war against a strong Israel. Moreover, there is an
international juridical foundation of inter-state borders that can serve
as at least a legal basis for reaching peace settlements that in effect
embody finality.

Palestinian territorialism does not limit the conflict to known and
recognized international borders, because there are none. And
Palestinian territorial identity does not stop at the 1967 boundaries.
Hence agreements that embody finality with the Palestinians are much
more difficult to achieve, and may indeed be unattainable. Further, the
Palestinians' very communal identity was molded in the course of a
bitter conflict between Jews and Arabs over the fate of the Land of
Israel. Their defeat in 1948 was a traumatic formative experience.
Defeat and exile are the conscious pillars of the Palestinian shared
fate and national cohesiveness. In the conflict between Israel and Arab
states it is possible to reach agreements by solving the problems
created in 1967, by withdrawing from territories conquered then, without
challenging the existence of the State of Israel. But on the Palestinian
track it is far more difficult, perhaps impossible, to do so.

On the Palestinian track, alongside the "1967 questions" that await
solutions there are also "1948 questions" whose resolution is liable not
merely to detract from Israel's territorial dimensions, but to strike at
its very existence as a Jewish state. At the top of the list of "1948
questions" are two fundamental problems that Israel will be hard put to
solve in ways that satisfy Palestinian national demands: one is the 1948
refugee problem and the right of return, and the other is the national
identity of Palestinians who are Israeli citizens and have increasing
difficulty coming to terms with Israel as the national state of the
Jewish people. Hence on the Palestinian track it is more realistic to
think only in terms of managing and controlling the conflict rather than
solving it with "finality."

Under these circumstances, Israel cannot allow itself to leave Arafat or
any other Palestinian leadership the right to veto fateful
decision-making for the State of Israel. They must not be permitted, in
view of their avoidance of a settlement, to lock Israel into a status
quo that works to its detriment. The establishment of a Palestinian
state alongside Israel, even as a consequence of unilateral separation,
is thus specifically in the Israeli interest. Separation in this sense
means not only an enhancement of Israel's near-term security through the
construction of a security fence, dismantling of isolated settlements
and more rational military deployment. It also means ensuring the very
long-term existence of the Jewish state by guaranteeing its Jewish
majority and creating a controlled and restricted border.

Failure to take these steps will sooner or later lead Israel into the
South Africa model. No longer two states for two peoples, but rather one
country between the river and the sea where Palestinian Arabs are a
growing majority. At that point Israel will find itself struggling with
a Palestinian demand that is already being heard on both sides of the
Green Line, for majority rule in a single country. If the State of
Israel wishes to survive, it must do all in its power to avoid such a
sorry reality of tragic bloodshed for both sides, caused by their lack
of awareness or incapacity to make fateful decisions.

