It's not a secret that the Palestinians in particular, perhaps the Arabs
in general, were interested in seeing the end of the Bush era. This is
not necessarily because they had a particular interest or any rational
desire to see Senator John Kerry in his place but rather is a result of
the bitter experience Palestinians have had after four years of
President George W. Bush.

The fundamental difference between the Bush presidency and previous
American administrations is the ideological flavor of this
administration and the effect of that on Washington's approach to the
Middle East.

The Palestinians are used to an American bias toward Israel; it's
neither new, nor was it expected to be any different when Bush first
came to power. But Bush and his administration went beyond just the
ordinary US bias toward Israel and against the Palestinians--its
traditional military, political and economic support for Israel. This
administration sunk to new levels in its lack of sensitivity to specific
stipulations of international legality and relevant resolutions of the
United Nations Security Council that used to govern at least the
official American position on the conflict.

The most obvious example of this deviation from accepted international
standards was Bush's assurances to Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
in response to the latter's so-called Gaza disengagement plan back in
April. The positions outlined in the president's letter to Sharon on
borders, refugees and settlements were a clear departure from previous
constants of American administrations, from international legality and,
perhaps more astonishingly, even from this administration's own roadmap
plan.

The other source of Palestinian unease about the Bush administration is
the linkage that it made between terrorist activities and Palestinian
efforts, including the use of violence, to end the illegal Israeli
occupation of Palestinian land and the violence that occupation has
wrought upon the Palestinian people. This attitude apparently led the
American administration to refrain from assuming any role to resolve the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. This, in turn, contributed dramatically to
encourage Israel--which happens to be under a politically and
ideologically extremist leadership--to proceed with a strategy of trying
to impose a solution through force. In other words, this non-engagement
left Palestinians at the mercy of the Israeli military machine, which
resulted in the deterioration in the security, political and economic
situations that we face today.

The next four years of Bush may not necessarily be a continuity of the
first term. The elections might give the administration pause to look
back at its previous four years with a critical eye. Any such evaluation
should lead them to conclude that there has been a distinct failure in
American Middle East policy vis-a-vis the Palestinian-Israeli conflict,
apparent from the obvious deterioration of the situation and from the
fact that Palestinians and Israelis are now much further from peace than
before. More importantly, from Washington's perspective, the interests
of the US are badly served by the policy of the past four years. The
credibility of the US is at its lowest ever in the Middle East and an
unavoidable and major factor in that is America's handling of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

Another reason for a possible change of direction from the American
administration is that it is now freed from the constraints of seeking
another term. There is no doubt that in his first term, especially in
the second half of that term, Bush was mainly focused on re-election and
his political behavior was tailored accordingly. And it is not a secret
that the pro-Israel lobby and Jewish-American factor is an important one
in this regard.

In order to help the administration in the new term improve its
performance in the Middle East there is a need for an active European
engagement with the United States to encourage the administration to be
more forthcoming and to invest some significant political capital in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. There is also a need for a more pro-active
and united Arab diplomatic strategy of the kind that can use the
strategic importance of the Arab world to further Arab causes, including
the Palestinian one.

