Although there has been a very deep and dangerous deterioration in the
relationship between the Palestinian and Israeli governments and their
respective publics, this deterioration has not yet become irreversible,
mainly because each side's electorate has an interest in reversing the
bloody conflict and returning to peace negotiations. The prolonging of
this fight, however, is deepening mutual mistrust and gravely affecting
new generations that might have been the vehicle for peace, but are now
caught up in a maelstrom of hatred and hostility.

There are two areas of action that are required in order to try to
regain confidence between the two sides. One is practical and the other
is political.

Initially, an important message sent to Palestinians from the Israeli
side--the main impetus for the current mistrust and lack of
confidence--was the election of the Israeli right wing and Ariel Sharon
in the position of prime minister. That was seen as a retreat from the
spirit of compromise that had characterized previous governments in Israel.

The dramatic escalation of Israeli practices such as the extra-judicial
killing of activists and civilians, the wanton destruction of
infrastructure and economy, and the collective punishment of the
Palestinian people through widespread military action, arrests,
closures, curfews and, in some cases, hunger, have caused Palestinians
to lose faith in Israel as a partner. Any attempt to regain the
confidence of the Palestinian people must include a complete halt to all
of these activities. The impression among Palestinians is not that these
actions are a reaction to Palestinian armed attacks, but rather that
they are rooted in a deep hatred for Palestinians in general, and the
desire to wreck anything that has meaning for the Palestinian
people--their educational system, the educational opportunities of their
young people, their culture and cultural institutions, the list goes on....

The other aspect that must be addressed in rebuilding trust is the
rhetoric coming from the Israeli side. Persistent Israeli dismissal of
the legitimate Palestinian desire for independence and Israel's
continued attempts to discredit the Palestinian leadership--despite its
election by the Palestinian people--as "a bunch of terrorists," and to
call the Palestinian search for freedom and independence "terrorism,"
must come to an end. Moreover, this Israeli government's blunt public
statements expressing lack of commitment to the peace process, the very
notion of territorial compromise and United Nations Resolution 242,
cannot continue if trust is to be restored.

These messages contribute to Palestinian suspicion. In their stead,
Israelis should give the impression that they are willing to end
entirely the Israeli occupation. Palestinians consider the construction
of settlements an indicator of Israeli will in that direction. An
illegal settlement expansion policy in which Israel confiscates by
virtue of force land owned by Palestinian individuals for the purpose of
settling Jewish settlers is intended to consolidate Israel's occupation.
Despite Israeli statements to the contrary, when Palestinians see
settlements growing, they cannot be expected to acquiesce to a "peaceful
occupation."

For their part, Palestinians must also be more careful in the impression
they are giving the other side. First, Palestinians must make sure that
they are sending the right message, which is that while Palestinians
will not accept anything less than a complete end to the occupation as
per international law, their territorial claims extend no further than
the fulfillment of that law. Palestinians must make sure that Israelis
can hear that message through the din, and they must also make sure that
their activities do not contradict that objective.

