Q: As someone who has observed United States involvement
from the 1991 Madrid conference till now, how would you assess its role?

A: I don't really see any important change from Madrid to Aqaba,
despite that American policy under President George W. Bush has been far
less involved than that under the administrations of presidents Clinton
and Bush Sr. Perhaps over the last few weeks there has been some
activation of the American role, but we have yet to feel any progress on
the ground. To date, American policy from this administration still
supports the Israeli point of view accusing Palestinians of being
"terrorists" and accusing this struggle against occupation of being
"terrorist", all of which negates the United Nations charter giving
people under occupation the right to struggle against that occupation.

Despite the many years of occupation--now exceeding 36 years--there have
been no effective measures implementing United Nations Resolutions 338
                  , 242                    and 1397                    ,
as well as others related to the Palestinian problem. Indeed, we hope
that this new activity of the Americans will be translated into a real
vision on the ground and real progress in terms of pressuring the
Israeli government to take measures to end the military occupation of
the Palestinian territories, while first stopping Israeli aggression and
settlement activities in those territories.

Q: Can you name some positive contributions that the United
States has made in the history of the conflict?

A: During Madrid and after, there was hope among Palestinians
that the Americans would adopt an effective role. After President Bush's
initiative in 1991 and the measures he took against Mr. Shamir at that
time, we expected positive things. [Ed.'s note: George Bush Sr. withheld
US loan guarantees until Israel agreed in part to stop some settlement
construction.] We were also impressed by Mr. Clinton's active role and
active sharing in solving the problem by receiving Mr. Arafat in the
White House several times and visiting Palestine, but we were shocked
after Mr. Bush came to office. He denied Palestinians the right to their
elected president and banned President Arafat, thereby interfering with
internal Palestinian affairs.

This negatively affected the Palestinian people, who felt that the
Americans were following the lead of the Israelis--as if Palestinians
were occupying Israeli land. Frankly, there is now mistrust between the
Palestinian people and the American administration, but we hope that the
American administration will take steps to restore trust. There must be
good trust between the two sides.

Q: What was your opinion of Prime Minister Abbas' speech
                          in Aqaba?

A: The truth is that Mr. Abbas' statement was cause for
criticism from the Palestinian people. Bush asked each leader to state
his commitment towards the other side, but Mr. Sharon did not do this.
It seemed to our people that Mr. Abbas was being pressured by the
Americans and the Israelis, while Mr. Sharon was not. This was what made
our people angry with this speech.

Maybe they expected Mr. Abbas to give a strong statement similar to that
of Sharon                           , but because Mr. Abbas was
addressing the Americans, international opinion and Israeli opinion, he
forgot the opinion of his people. Sharon, on the other hand, first
addressed his people. But this imbalance in the statements demonstrates
once again that Mr. Abbas is sincere in his commitment to the roadmap
                       , while Mr. Sharon is not.

Q: Do you think that the roadmap has failed?

A: I can't say that, but I think it is in danger. I think Sharon
and his friends are not sincere, but that the Americans can still make
this roadmap succeed if they pressure the Israeli side. They have
convinced Mr. Abbas, and even though his statement made problems among
Palestinians, he remains committed to this process. Now the American
role is to pressure Sharon.

