Q: How serious do you feel the breakdown of law and order
we seem to be seeing around us is at the moment? 

A: I don't think this issue should be exaggerated. What has
happened so far was easy to contain, for the time being. I think what
happened was an alarm for the Palestinian Authority and Palestinians in
general to take care of a large number of accumulating problems. It was
a warning to people to turn their attention to tackling these problems
before they explode in our faces once again, perhaps in a more serious
way. 

But I would not suggest that Palestinian society is on the verge of
collapse. This is not the first time Palestinian society confronts this
type of problem. There is the continuation of the Israeli occupation,
military incursions and the siege, and despite all these problems,
Palestinian society has demonstrated a great deal of resilience. 

Q: You talk of this as a warning to the PA. A warning to
do what? 

A: It's a warning that unless we turn our attention to fix the
Palestinian order in its entirety, in terms of political, security,
administrative, and legal reform, we may face problems similar to the
ones that we have encountered recently, illustrated in the state of
lawlessness and certain violations of the rule of law, even political
violence, that resulted in confrontations and the burning of PA or
security institutions, etc. 

Q: Particularly from the international community you often
hear the demand that the PA should assert itself to set its house in
order. To what extent is this possible, while Israel continues its
military incursion and checkpoints, etc? 

A: The Israeli measures against the Palestinian people and the
Authority, and the siege on the Palestinian president, the restriction
of movement and the continued incursions and assassinations, make it
extremely difficult for people to focus on fixing their internal
situation. However, there are things that are within reach and that
could and should be done. Of course, nobody is demanding that the PA do
things beyond its means, we understand this and the reason we want to
fix our internal situation is because doing so will make the Palestinian
people more immune vis-a-vis the Israeli aggression and the state of
siege. 

Q: Do you feel there is any significance in the news that
the police will now be able to carry arms again? 

A: Well, the preliminary, modest and partial deployment of the
Palestinian police force is significant from the political,
psychological and security point of view, i.e., that the tools of law
and order are back in Palestinian cities and villages. This is a good
step, but I think the success of this depends very much on the Israelis,
whether they will allow this modest step to succeed or not, whether they
want to enable the Palestinian police to reassert itself, which also
means a reassertion of the PA. It won't succeed unless the Israelis are
serious in enabling them to undertake renewed responsibilities in
maintaining law and order in the Palestinian areas. 

Q: Isn't there a danger that the police will be seen as
Israeli proxies? 

A: I don't think so. They will not receive orders from the
Israelis. Of course the Israelis will impose a number of restrictions on
the mandate, movement and work of the police, but these men will be
receiving their orders from the Palestinian leadership. 

Q: You mentioned judicial reform. How important is this
and what exactly is needed? Are we talking about the ratification of the
constitution, or where are we going from here? 

A: I think the reason we are seeing all these problems is
because the separation of powers has not yet been established in the PA.
If there was separation of powers of the legislative, executive and
judiciary, and if there was independence of the judiciary, we wouldn't
have seen these kinds of problems. That's why judiciary reform is
necessary, to get a separation of powers and also in terms of having
specific job descriptions for the people who work in the judiciary. 

Q: And are you optimistic that such reform will take place
in the near future? 

A: I'm not sure. This has been a standing problem for a long
time and I have no reason to believe that it will be solved tomorrow. I
hope it will, but I'm kind of skeptical. 

Q: Yet you feel it is one the elements that need to be
solved in order to avoid a repeat of recent events? 

A: Well, this is the mechanism to take care of the state of law
and order and due process in our society. I think that without a
reformed, effective and independent judiciary nothing can be fixed in
the Palestinian situation and violations of the rule of law will
continue. So this is one of the main pillars in reforming the
Palestinian order.

