It is perhaps an irony that the party in this conflict with, relatively
speaking, weak law and order enforcement structure is very much
dependent on and hopeful of international law, while the party so proud
of its internal legal and judiciary structure consistently undermines
and disregards international legality.

Theoretically speaking there should be a strong connection between the
strength of internal legal structures and respect for international law,
because there should be no contradiction between any law in any specific
country and international law. Indeed, if there is a legal ruling in any
country that contradicts international law, legally speaking,
international law ought to be the dominant.

Israel has always made special efforts to impart the impression, first
to Israelis and second to the international community, especially
western democracies, that it is a democratic and lawful society and
polity. This is one of the ways in which Israel identifies as part of
western civilization. The fact that Israel has mostly been in
contradiction with specific stipulations of international law and
certain United Nations Security Council resolutions probably plays a
part in this.

Israel has been at odds with international law in several ways.
Internally, it treats one-fifth of its own citizens, the Palestinians of
Israel, with obvious racial discrimination. Israel, in this regard, also
publicly presents an attitude in violation of its citizens' rights and
international law when it calls for the necessity of preserving the
pureness of a specific race inside Israel.

Israel is also in consistent violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
which regulates relations between an occupying power and the people
under occupation. Occupied Palestinian land, belonging to individuals or
peasants who still carry the deeds, has been confiscated to settle
Israel's own civilian population. Recently, the Israel High Court's
approval in principle of Israel's separation wall, despite quibbles
about details, is in direct opposition to the legal opinion of the
International Court of Justice.

It would be difficult to count all the violations of the Israeli
occupation, but they are well documented and usually systematically
presented, not only by relevant UN agencies or other international
humanitarian agencies, but sometimes even by Israeli groups and
organizations that oppose such illegality, e.g. B'Tselem.

In Palestine, things are completely different. The Palestinian people
and leadership have always been keen to base their positions and claims
and modify them in accordance with international law. If anybody wants
to know what exactly the ultimate objective of the Palestinian people's
struggle is, the answer will be a complete adherence to and
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and
the relevant stipulations of international law.

And yet, the Palestinian people and their Authority, who succeeded in
moving ahead with many reforms, including in the financial and civil
service spheres, have unfortunately made little progress in improving
their judiciary system and enforcing law and order.

Part of this can rightly be blamed on the Israeli interruption of the
move from limited self-rule in part of the occupied territories into a
full fledged independent and sovereign state on all the Palestinian
territories, which took place immediately after the collapse of final
status negotiations and the return to violent confrontation and
reoccupation.

A solution to the conflict might come from efforts to modify the legal
systems of the two sides whereby each will be in harmony with the
relevant aspects and components of international law. The Palestinian
Authority will do its people great favor if it improves the judiciary
system in order to live up to the standards of international law. And
the Israelis will contribute significantly to ending this conflict if
they modify their legal mentality and system so as to fall into line
with international law and the relevant Security Council
resolutions.

