The usual logic of conflict resolution dictates that the restoration of
trust between Israelis and Palestinians begin with an effort by people
of good will on both sides to formulate compromise solutions, and engage
in joint enterprises, that can serve as CBMs, or confidence building
measures. If the two sides have difficulty sitting down together, a
third party can convene them and even mediate their deliberations. This
is the way the necessary trust and confidence were created in the course
of efforts spread over the past two decades that produced the Oslo
agreements. It stands to reason that if and when Israelis and
Palestinians again reach political agreements, this is the way it will
happen.

But right now this doesn't seem to work well. After two years of armed
conflict and the seeming disappearance of any capacity for mutual
communication by Israelis and Palestinians, attempts to restore trust by
talking to one another appear to be fruitless, and at times even
counterproductive. The reason appears to involve the two sides'
conflicting narratives: at Camp David and Taba in 2000-2001 the process
reached a point where efforts to resolve the national/religious/historic
narratives--regarding the refugee issue, i.e., the events of 1948, and
the Temple Mount/Harem a-Sharif issue--were the main items remaining on
the agenda. But these are the most difficult issues. Add to them now a
new clash of narratives--over who started the current violent conflict
and why--and it's easy to understand why most serious attempts to
restore trust through bilateral discussion either deteriorate into angry
recriminations or end up in agreements that are admirable but marginal.

Yet Israelis and Palestinians are tired of conflict and are looking for
a way out.

I recently attended yet another of the many efforts at renewed dialogue.
A joint attempt to draw up an agreed formula for renewed peace talks
generated a Palestinian initiative to fix exclusive responsibility for
the events of 1948 on Israel, along with a relatively new Palestinian
demand: that even after peace and an "end of conflict" pact, Palestine
and Palestinians be allowed to sue Israel for compensation for all the
"evils" of the occupation since 1967.

The Israelis present at the meeting saw these demands as antithetical to
their narrative and designed to prolong, rather than end, the conflict,
and rejected them. Even Jordanian and Egyptian participants in the
meeting were baffled by the Palestinian attitude. When the Israeli side
suggested that the parties might be able to unite around the
Nusseibeh-Ayalon formula or the Ziad Abu Zayyad formula--two recent
efforts that seek to present an agreed middle ground and feature more
moderate Palestinian attitudes regarding the right of return and the
Temple Mount/Harem a-Sharif--they were informed by the Palestinian
"peace camp" that these formulae were non-starters: not a single
prominent Palestinian would sign on to them.

While such meetings are important and must be continued, for the time
being they do not improve trust; indeed, they may be damaging it. It is
only when we look to the realm of unilateral, rather than bilateral
initiatives, that some progress in confidence building appears possible.

This is the paradox of unilateral initiatives. Given the current
atmosphere, what cannot be done through dialogue and agreement might be
possible if each side works on its own. Two examples will suffice, one
from each side.

Originally Palestinians undertook, in accordance with Oslo, to prevent
terrorism and provide security to Israelis. They failed. Now Palestinian
militant organizations are discussing initiatives to declare a
unilateral ceasefire, not out of concern for the welfare of Israelis,
but rather in view of what they consider to be enlightened
self-interest. If a unilateral ceasefire works, it's also good for
Israelis, and can build trust.

Israel originally agreed under Oslo to withdraw from territories and,
implicitly, to cease building settlements on those territories--and
failed. Now more and more Israelis are discussing withdrawing
unilaterally from part of those same territories. They are doing so not
to please the Palestinians or comply with agreements, but rather out of
what they consider to be enlightened self-interest: to guarantee their
own security (particularly against suicide bombers) with a "separation
fence," rid themselves of the evils of occupation, and respond to the
Palestinian demographic threat. While Palestinians are troubled by these
Israeli unilateral initiatives, they also recognize that they can
benefit from them, by taking possession of additional territories
currently occupied by Israel and witnessing the removal of the most
provocative settlements.

These unilateral initiatives cannot replace a peace process. They cannot
and should not even replace the kind of track II meetings, however
problematic, described above. But in the absence of trust and
confidence, they are in many ways the only non-violent game in town. If
they stabilize the situation and reduce violence by lessening friction,
they can contribute to a confidence-building process that can eventually
return the two parties to the negotiating table in an atmosphere of
enhanced trust.

Hence they should be encouraged by all interested parties.

