The rule of law is a core need of every state. When most people living
in a state accept the rule of law, they generally live in peace with
each other; all except for the criminal fringe, who scorn the law, and
upon whom the state seeks to impose criminal law. When a state fails to
impose the rule of law on all groups and clans, including independent
armed organizations, the state veers toward chaos and pervasive human
misery.

Such for example, is the condition in several African states that over
the decades since independence failed to develop the rule of law. Such
is also the condition of Iraq, liberated from the rule of a cruel despot
yet unable to establish a state with the rule of law.

Such also is the tragic path onto which Yasser Arafat has led the
Palestinian people since his return after the Oslo agreements. Instead
of seeking to develop a state with the rule of law, a state in which
only state organizations carry weapons, he preferred to let existing
groups, including armed groups, act as they wish. Moreover he failed to
establish an independent judicial system, thus subjecting the courts of
justice to the whims of politicians. The result is that externally the
Palestinian Authority is fast losing international credibility as an
effective partner in the peace process, and internally there is
increasing chaos, as different organizations and clans use violence
against their opponents.

What about Israel? When Israel was established Prime Minister David Ben
Gurion said the rule of law was vital for the survival of the state.
After the IDF (Israel Defense Forces) was created he ordered the
dismantling of all other armed organizations, such as the Palmach, Etzel
(Irgun) and Lehi. From the start, the judicial system was independent
and since the first years of Israel it has made many key decisions that
were not necessarily in accord with the government line.

Tragically, the continued occupation of Palestinian territory by Israel
has gradually undermined the rule of law as a core Israeli value.
Primarily this happens in the occupied territories, where dozens of
settlements were established regardless of any law and where groups of
settlers use deliberate violence against the Palestinians and against
their property. Also the IDF, which is obliged to fight against
potential murderers of Jews, often kills, harms and humiliates many
innocent Palestinians, including women and children. Inside Israel, the
courts of justice still make independent decisions, such as the recent
High Court decision obliging the government to draw back parts of the
separation fence now being constructed. Nevertheless there is a
continued increase in the number of cases where the rule of law is
completely ignored, as in the growing number of illegal links between
capitalism and government.

This double tragedy between Israel and the Palestinians does not bode
well for peace. Without the effective rule of law on both sides, there
can be no effective peace process. And the absence of a peace process
will further undermine the rule of law on both sides.

