In spite of dramatic announcements every now and then, Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon has been consistent in his government's positions
and practices. Motivated by his ideology, his strategy was, and still
is, to undo the developments created by the Oslo agreement that he
opposed. That includes regaining direct control over the Palestinian
territories, being part of the historical land of greater Israel, and
dismantling the Palestinian Authority because of its potential
development into a Palestinian government.

The Israeli illegal settlement expansion policy has been one of the
major tools for achieving these strategic objectives. The expansion of
Jewish settlements on confiscated Palestinian land has proved to be
incompatible with peace. In fact, peace requires dismantlement of these
settlements. For these reasons, Sharon's recent announcement about
evacuating settlements in Gaza was not taken seriously by Palestinians
who were not excited at all, even though the evacuation of the
settlements is a core issue.

Palestinians know that Sharon stands for the expansion of settlements
and cannot be for evacuating them. Soon, Palestinian political instincts
will be proved correct. Sharon wants to evacuate settlements in Gaza in
order to consolidate and expand settlements in West Bank including East
Jerusalem which of course has major ideological dimensions. Again, this
goes to prove his consistency.

Their should be no doubt that this recent political move by Sharon is
also a sign of crisis which stems from his arrogance and die hard belief
that he can achieve peace and security only by force. Hence the moniker,
"if force is not working then the answer is more force." Gaza, which is
kept under tight Israeli control as a bargaining chip, has been a heavy
security, political and moral burden.

In addition Sharon needed to release some of the pressure on Israel
resulting from mounting international criticism regarding the continued
building of what the Palestinians call the apartheid separation wall.
The timing of this "initiative", coming on the eve of a scheduled visit
by Sharon to Washington where he is expected to be on the defensive on
numerous issues, is suspect at best. The American administration will be
conducting the talks according to the parameters of the roadmap which
Sharon has never really supported. He will also face difficulties on the
wall and settlement expansion, especially in light of the growing
noise--including inside Washington--concerning the negative effect of
his policy on "Bush's vision" in conjunction with the demographic issue.

Accordingly, this new announcement will be a useful tactic to diffuse
pressure and divert attention, on the short term, and on the other hand
it will contribute to the consolidation of the occupation. What this
initiative will fail to achieve, however, are the declared Israeli
objectives of peace and security. The events of the last three years
have shown that violence will only breed more violence. The deepening
and widening of this vicious circle of bloodshed will only hasten the
ongoing radicalization in both Israeli and Palestinian societies, with
long term negative effects on any potential peace not only for now, but
also for the future.

