There are many reasons why American intervention is inevitable in the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. All over the world, United States?
dominance and attempts to influence developments in its favor mean an
involved US actor. But in this conflict in particular, one party--i.e.
Israel--has always depended on the United States for aspects of its
economic, political and military survival. Nor is that influence
straightforward. There is a unique relationship between Israel and the
United States, whereby attitudes towards Israel are shaped both in the
arena of United States foreign policy and as a result of internal
political wrangling, due to the many friends of Israel and the strong
Jewish lobby inside the United States government.

There /are/ American interests to protect on the other side of the
conflict, i.e. in the Arab world. These include oil, strategic
geographic positioning and the cultivation of allies. But the difference
in impact between these US interests and those on the Israeli side is
that the Arabs in general have not been active in using US regional
interests to their political favor, at least towards a just resolution
of the Middle East conflict. This is no coincidence, but largely a
result of the absence of democracy in the Arab world. The practices of
most Arab regimes do not necessarily reflect their publics' interest,
which in turn helps explain the ongoing American support for
non-democratic regimes in this part of the world: for the US to question
those regimes would open a Pandora's box of new demands on US foreign
policy.

Recent years, which include several attempts to establish a peace
process beginning with the 1991 Madrid peace conference, demonstrate
that only United States' involvement allows negotiations to progress. By
the same token, it can be argued that at every turn the limited nature
of the American intervention has been at least partially responsible for
subsequent failures.

Palestinians were encouraged by the establishment of the Quartet, made
up of United States, United Nations, European Union and Russian
representation, simply because they believed it might reduce the
American monopoly over the peace process, which has yet to be productive
because US Middle East policy is not sensitive enough to the conflict's
framework of international law. But we have just witnessed one more
example of the dire need for American interference, in this case an
intervention that arrived despite all pessimistic predictions. Many
analysts argue that the US intervened only after Israel failed in using
a US-proffered window of opportunity to end the confrontations using
force. The consequence of this failure was to be added pressure on
Israel to accept the roadmap                         and come to the
negotiating table.

The subsequent failure of the American intervention in Aqaba to press
Israel to fulfill only the very first step of roadmap implementation,
therefore, is an illustration of historic American diplomatic
shortcomings. The text of the roadmap stipulates that implementation be
initiated via simultaneous statements from each side, each party
recognizing the other, committing to stop violence against the other,
and also committing to the implementation of the roadmap. While the
United States did everything in its power to make sure that Palestinian
Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas would include these elements and more in
his statement                          , they did not ensure the same of
Israel.

Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon said he welcomed the opportunity "to
renew direct negotiations according to the steps of the road map as
adopted by the Israeli Government to achieve [the Bush] vision." This
legalistic formula falls short of accepting the roadmap outright. Sharon
also failed to say that Israel would stop violence against Palestinians
wherever they are, as the roadmap required, and also did not offer clear
recognition of a Palestinian state. It was perfectly consistent for
Israel, then, the very next day to resume the use of violence as it
killed two Palestinian men and injured a third in an attempt to
assassinate them all. Further, Israeli restrictions on Palestinian
movement, which are an immense psychological barrier towards
negotiations for the general population, are now worse than ever before.

The position of Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas has been deeply weakened,
then, since he promised his constituency that Palestinian commitments to
Israel would be matched by an end to Israeli violence, the dismantling
of certain settlements and a halt to construction in others, as well as
the lifting of the insufferable roadblocks. By not bringing Israel to
the table, the United States has once again shot itself in the foot.

