The history of American foreign and defense policy since the beginning
of the twentieth century comprises dramatic shifts between phases of
intensive involvement in the international arena, and periods of
relative or complete disengagement from the outside world. The intense
involvement phase originates in a desire to reshape the external
environment on the basis of new premises; the disengagement phase is
characterized by the absence of any effort to influence developments
abroad, as in the period between the two world wars.

United States President Woodrow Wilson sought to build a new world order
on the basis of his "Fourteen Points," and viewed American entry into
World War I as the necessary springboard for promoting his sweeping
political, ideological and territorial vision. But the administrations
which followed his presidency largely avoided such a sweeping definition
of the changes required in the domestic structure and modus operandi of
the national units comprising this system. At the outset of the Cold War
several American leaders, such as John Foster Dulles, who served as
secretary of state in President Dwight Eisenhower's administration
between 1953-1959, did occasionally allude to the need to roll the
Soviet empire back from Eastern Europe. But their actual policy was
largely rooted in the defensive premises of containment, deterrence and
coercion.

An examination of the first eight months of George W. Bush's tenure as
president indicates that they were predicated upon these traditional
principles of containment and deterrence. The Bush foreign and defense
policy elites were initially predisposed to pursue a unilateralist,
largely exclusionist posture. They sought to minimize the risk of
military entanglements in third-world areas, and instead to rely upon
the tools of deterrence and coercive diplomacy in confronting threats to
American security, including in the Iraqi context.

Indeed, during the period which preceded the September 11 attacks, the
neo-conservative belief that American foreign policy should be prepared,
in confronting national security threats, to take the initiative rather
than merely to react, and thus in the absence of broad international
support to unilaterally launch preventive strikes by using American
military hegemony to destroy the forces of international terrorism,
amounted to nothing more than an intellectual platform. Notwithstanding
the fact that the neo-conservative agenda came to increasingly permeate
and shape the thinking of policymakers like Deputy Secretary of Defense
Paul Wolfowitz and defense planners and analysts at the Pentagon during
the last decade, it was only in the aftermath of September 11, 2001 that
it was translated into an official and operational guide for action.

Thus by virtue of its magnitude and impact upon American strategic
thinking, the tragedy of September 11 can be viewed as a formative
traumatic event which precipitated a change in the traditional modus
operandi of American foreign policy. From the conservative pole of
defending the status quo that policy moved to the revisionist extreme of
seeking to transform the entire international system so that it would
conform with American ideas, values and institutions. The Iraqi campaign
was the first step in this direction.

It is against the backdrop of this sweeping neo-conservative doctrine
that the recent American preoccupation with the Palestinian issue, most
clearly manifested in the Sharm al-Sheikh and Aqaba summits, should be
viewed. This doctrine envisions a direct linkage between the Iraqi
campaign and the subsequent transformation in the structure of other
regional social and political systems. Thus it was only natural for
President Bush to look for regional windows of opportunity for progress
along the route toward the Wilsonian goal of democracy. It is at this
juncture that the roadmap                         of the Quartet,
combined with the election of Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) as the
Palestinian prime minister, became the main springboard for the
administration in its effort to translate its strategic and ideological
thinking into a new regional reality.

The president brought to this effort new leverage as an undisputed
hegemon. He had recently comprehensively demonstrated, in Iraq, his
readiness to use force to combat the threat inherent in rogue states and
in international terrorism, as the means of laying the groundwork for a
new--and democratic--regional environment. While his initial effort in
the Israeli-Palestinian context may appear successful in the immediate
aftermath of the Aqaba summit, this does not guarantee, of course, that
the roadmap will be smoothly implemented. With the parties still
separated by irreconcilable views concerning core issues, and with the
president about to become increasingly preoccupied with the requirements
of the 2004 presidential campaign, the road toward reconciliation may
still be long and rocky, particularly as the shadow of terrorism looms
as a constant threat to the entire process.

