The Middle East conflict has no shortage of international law to guide
its resolution. What is missing is really the political will of
governments to undertake their responsibilities according to their
mandate within the body of international law and international
humanitarian law. This absence of political will has kept Middle East
societies, particularly Palestinian society, lingering too long in a
situation of perpetual fear and conflict.

Palestinian society has yearned for too long for peace and security. We
have yearned to be able to move around freely without asking permission
from young gun-toting Israeli soldiers placed practically on our
doorsteps. We have yearned for the time when we do not have to worry
about our children going safely to school. We have yearned for too long
for the security of exercising our right to self-expression and
self-determination without being thrown in jail.

I can say, as a representative of Palestinian civil society and the
women's movement, that despite these handicaps and with international
support, we had come a long way in developing institutions to address
Palestinians' social needs for a future Palestinian state.

For example, the Palestinian women's movement had succeeded at making
inroads in addressing cultural values and attitudes particular to the
Arab world that handicap the healthy development of girls and women. We
Palestinian women were in the process of engaging ourselves in
legislative development locally and internationally. And we were
witnessing the development of a budding but vibrant young feminist
movement, an essential sector for democratic development within
Palestinian society.

But the last Israeli "reoccupation" of Palestinian controlled areas has
resulted in the systematic destruction of all that we have achieved over
the last ten years. The military onslaught was aimed at dashing any
hopes for a coherent Palestinian state and identity.

In the eyes of the average Palestinian, our society has been effectively
left at the mercy of a hostile state that continually violates with
impunity through the illegal and endless Israeli occupation almost every
law in the book regarding the behavior of states in armed conflict.
Having no effective Palestinian state to defend our interests, nor an
effective international third party to ensure the respect of the law,
desperate elements in Palestinian society have felt they have no choice
but to resort to their own means for self-defense.

Israel's continued violations of the laws of conflict have resulted in a
likewise violent and illegal response by Palestinian non-state actors.
This cycle of action and reaction has allowed the Israeli state in the
name of self-defense to use formal state military strategies and means
against none state actors and the communities they belong to as
collective punishment, leading the Palestinian community to feel that it
has nothing more to lose. Palestinians understand that the political
objectives of this military campaign are to break the Palestinian spirit
and force them to accept an agreement that is no agreement at all.

For the sake of preserving life, and in order to make political
negotiations possible, it is essential to create an environment of hope
by immediately sending international peacekeeping forces with a mandate
of protection. Any future negotiations must remain under international
auspices to ensure respect for international frameworks. The two
parties--Palestinian and Israeli--are not equal and should not be left
on their own. Otherwise, the process will be dictated by the imbalance
of power that characterized the Oslo negotiations, whose bloody
consequences we are now witnessing.

Peace is made between peoples and not between leaders. A process leading
to a sustainable and consequently permanent solution should be just, and
should not be left to the confines of the generals, and should be
transparent to the relevant societies.

We have to address and understand each other's history with open minds.
Our leaders have a responsibility to educate their societies about the
other as a matter of policy. If we leave things only to government
officials, we get Israeli generals and Palestinians who will not be
defeated, and there is no room to negotiate. Women's participation in
any future peace process is essential to maintaining the connection
between each society's realities and its yearnings for peace and security.

We cannot afford to waste any more time, or any more lives. We need to
think of a new approach. We as women want to bring a new understanding
to the situation in the Middle East. We want to approach peace building
in a way that will promote long-term stability. But we cannot do it
alone. We are asking for the help of the international community. Women
know instinctively that the use of force will never lead to peace,
justice or even security.

Despite all the disappointments and recent setbacks, it is important not
to give up on the region and, indeed, to capitalize on the strong need
and desire existing in both societies for security and stability. The
rule of law is essential for peace and harmony. We have to replace the
rule of force, which has governed our region for too long, with the rule
of law. This is the challenge before the international
community.

