When Ariel Sharon revealed his plan to evacuate Israeli settlements from
Gaza and beyond, he was not simply shifting the focus away from the
scandals facing his family. The investigations may have accelerated or
delayed the process, but from an Israeli perspective, the logic of
unilateral disengagement is inescapable. As one of the founders of
Israel's post-1967 settlement policy, Sharon resisted this approach for
a long time. But if he had not announced this move, another leader would
have. If he is forced to resign, his successor is likely to follow a
similar course.

Public opinion polls and other indicators demonstrate that the majority
of Israelis view the territorial status quo, based on a Swiss-cheese map
of intertwined Palestinian cities and Israeli settlements, as
unacceptable. Israeli military responses to three years of terror have
been quite effective, but sporadic attacks continue, and the costs of
protecting small and isolated settlements are unreasonable. In addition,
the multiple checkpoints, frequent closures and other sources of daily
friction between individual Palestinians and Israeli soldiers contribute
to the tension. And the political status quo poses a demographic threat
to the survival of Israel as a Jewish and democratic state.

At the same time, the efforts to end this situation through negotiation
of a stable agreement, from Oslo to the Quartet's roadmap, have had
catastrophic results. Until there is a credible Palestinian leadership
to disarm the various factions and implement a lasting accord based on
the two-state model, negotiations are not going to end the conflict, and
may add to the violence. The evolution of a pragmatic Palestinian
leadership anchored in basic societal changes will take many years or
decades. Until then, Geneva and other paper concepts discussed under
Arafat's watchful eye simply lack credibility, and public relations
campaigns supported by the EU will not change this situation.

Under these conditions, unilateral disengagement has become the least
bad option, as many Israelis, including Sharon, now recognize. In the
absence of what academics and policy makers refer to as "ripeness", in
terms of broad societal readiness to make realistic compromises, Israel
needs to define pragmatic de facto borders. This logic led to the
intense public demand for construction of a separation
barrier/fence/wall, which has proven effective in protecting the
northern coastal cities such as Netanya and Hadera from terror attacks.

The construction of a separation barrier, and a clear, if
temporary, boundary, only makes sense with the reduction in the points of
friction and greater contiguity for the vast majority of both
Palestinians and Israelis. This means the removal of isolated
settlements near Palestinian cities, and strengthening of Israeli
control in strategic areas, including Jerusalem and the Jordan Valley,
to ensure border control. (This is not a peace plan, and political and
diplomatic issues related to the 1949 ceasefire line, the "Green
Line", are irrelevant.)

However, despite the logic and support from the Israeli consensus, the
implementation of this process will be difficult and costly. Sharon's
long-term core constituency anchored in Judea, Samaria and Gaza
denounced limited unilateral withdrawal as "appeasement", and violent
resistance is expected. If the issue is brought to a referendum, it is
likely to gain approval, but this could delay implementation, and force
some changes.

Opponents also argue that withdrawal from Gaza will be seen by
Palestinians as a victory, and, like the IDF's sudden pullout from
Lebanon in May 2000, will encourage more terror. However, others counter
that in the long term, Israeli security and deterrence were strengthened
by this move. Attacks are far less frequent and Hizbollah's power base
in Lebanon was weakened, as recognized by its backers in Damascus and
Teheran. Furthermore, many Palestinians, including Mahmoud Abbas (Abu
Mazen), have declared that the decision to copy Hizbollah's tactics of
terrorism was a disaster. Israel's unilateral withdrawal will give the
Palestinians far less than would have resulted from an agreement with
Ehud Barak four years ago, and efforts to use terms such as "apartheid"
to demonize Israel via the UN and the International Court will not
change the situation.

In addition, for Israel's Arab citizens, separation means an end to the
unfettered access to the West Bank that they have enjoyed since 1967.
However, in contrast to the period between 1948 and 1967, when this
territory was under Jordanian occupation and the armistice lines were
impassable, the current policy of unilateral disengagement includes
mechanisms for regulated movement at numerous crossing points. Jordanian
fears of a mass movement of Palestinians resulting from disengagement
are also unsupported.

As a result of these and other factors, the implementation of unilateral
disengagement, whether under Sharon's leadership or a successor, will
face many challenges. But unless a better option appears that provides
security, reduces friction and ensures the survival of Israel as a
Jewish democratic state, the course is unlikely to change.

