Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's controversial proposal to
"unilaterally disengage" from the Gaza Strip and the "pay-off" he was
given for that package by United States President George W. Bush have
stirred a great deal of debate in the region and throughout the world.
Unfortunately, many people have confused the Palestinians' reaction to
these two events, which should be seen as separate, albeit related.
First of all, Sharon's purported plan was never really made clear enough
for Palestinians to react to, and therefore was not taken seriously by
the Palestinian side. The letter of reassurances
                                                   offered by the United
States to Israel, on the other hand, was abundantly clear and viewed as
damaging to the future of peace in the region.

Palestinians have always been suspicious of Sharon's real intentions.
When Sharon's letter to Bush was made public, those feelings were
confirmed. The reasons that Palestinians were fairly certain that the
plan was a gimmick to lend legitimacy to Israel while extending Israel's
illegal occupation, were first, that Sharon's plan would have kept Gaza
under complete siege with the Israeli army controlling all entry and
exit points and seaports and airports; second, that Israel was reserving
the right to conduct any military operations in Gaza that it deemed
necessary; and finally, that the Israeli military would remain stationed
in some areas inside the Gaza Strip. That's pretty much the situation
today, in fact. Israel's army maintains a heavy armed presence outside
Palestinian Authority governed population centers and then storms in at
whim.

Certainly, the promised evacuation of the Israeli settlements was a
positive step, but it was a plum in an otherwise bitter pudding. Gaza
cannot stand on its feet alone economically. Further, the plan would
have altered Gaza's legal status, thus dividing it from the West Bank
both in economic continuity and administratively. Just to give an
example, with the assumed change in legal arrangements, how might any
kind of official registration been handled in order to span both the
Gaza Strip and the West Bank as joint legal entities representing the
future Palestinian state? The likely chaos seemed to be a trap for the
Palestinian Authority and its already disintegrating sovereignty.

A further reason for Palestinian suspicion was the intersection of this
plan and the second stage of the roadmap
                                                , which calls for an
"interim" Palestinian state before a final status agreement on borders.
Palestinians have always feared that these temporary borders would
become permanent by virtue of Israeli might. Lest we forget, Sharon took
office promising to arrive at a "long-term interim solution" with
Palestinians. According to his vision, Sharon believed that he could
arrive at a truncated Palestinian entity (call it what you like) that
would be comprised of all of Gaza and 40 percent of the West Bank, and
thus bypass final status negotiations based on the 1967 borders that are
rooted in international law.

All of this brings Palestinians to the conclusion that the ultimate
objective of Sharon's strategy (including this plan) is intended to
maintain the occupation and secure settlement expansion over two-thirds
of the occupied territories, all the while preventing the establishment
of an independent Palestinian state and consequently, the right to
self-determination. No less significant, they feel, is Sharon's goal of
rendering Palestinian objectives impossible vis-a-vis basic final status
issues, including the status of Jerusalem and the refugee right of return.

Nevertheless, Palestinian officials did not reject outright the prospect
of an Israeli withdrawal from Gaza. They tried to make it clear to the
outside world that without a coordinated handover and the necessary
economic conditions for improvement and viability, including finding
jobs for Gaza's 78,000 unemployed, the situation there was destined to
remain explosive and a source of instability.

In sum, without major adjustments Sharon's plan cannot constitute a
constructive step towards stability and peace building, but rather would
contribute to deepening the conflict. The international community must
play the role of assuring a reasonable transition, one that will be a
real end to the occupation rather than a "withdrawal", and provide the
Palestinian Authority with the necessary financial support for ensuring
economic and political stability and control.

