After negotiations that lasted through the nineties, we imagined that
Israelis and Palestinians were very close to signing a historic
agreement to end their struggle and open up the possibility for more
agreements with other Arab countries. At that time, most Palestinians
and Israelis believed that the negotiations had achieved approximately
95 percent of what they were supposed to accomplish, and that nothing
remained but to agree on a few select issues--albeit issues important to
each side.

Ariel Sharon, leading the opposition Likud party at the time of the Camp
David negotiations, did everything in his power to undermine those talks
and preclude an agreement that would end the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict. He achieved dazzling success and more. The Al Aqsa Intifada
flared and put an end to the peace negotiations. Then, in Sharon's first
government, he exploited the Labor Party to wipe out all of its
accomplishments towards peace with Palestinians. The West Bank was
completely reoccupied, already-weak Palestinian sovereignty was nearly
abrogated, and the Palestinian Authority was virtually destroyed.

Despite Sharon's extreme right-wing character, he now stands in his
newly formed second government at the far left of its members. This is
not because he has changed his views, but because the new government's
members are either just as right-wing and extremist as he is, or even
more so. In order to understand this government's position on peace, we
must refer to two extremely important documents: the coalition
guidelines and Sharon's December 4 speech at the Herzliya conference.
The coalition guidelines can be summarized as follows:

1. The government will work towards peace with the Palestinians and Arab
countries, on the condition that this does not harm the national,
historical and security interests of Israel and the Jewish people.

2. The government will work towards strengthening the position of
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

3. The government will work towards strengthening settlement
construction in all areas of the land of Israel.

4. Peace demands difficult concessions from all parties.

On the other hand, the primary idea in Sharon's Herzliya speech is that
of Palestinian statehood. According to that text, Sharon is prepared to
accept the establishment of a Palestinian state in stages. There can be
no progression to another stage until the previous stage is fully
implemented, and it is confirmed that Palestinians have fulfilled with
integrity and good intention all that is demanded of them.

To outline these stages, in the first, Palestinians must end the
Intifada and all acts of violence. The Palestinian Authority must
collect all weapons from Palestinian organizations and put an end to
incitement to violence in the Palestinian curriculum, among other
things. In the second stage, there must be fundamental reforms in the
Palestinian Authority, particularly regarding the powers and duties of
various governing institutions, as well as in the areas of finance and
security. There must be strong security cooperation between the
Authority and Israel. In the third stage, there must be Palestinian
elections. Only afterwards can a Palestinian state be established, and
then only in Areas A and B (areas of Palestinian control under signed
interim agreements). All external exits and airspace will remain under
Israeli control, assuming that the Israeli government coalition agrees
to this state project. In the subsequent stage, which is not defined by
a timeframe, negotiations will be held to end the Palestinian-Israeli
crisis once and for all.

For Palestinians, the proposals of Sharon and his government are not
serious at all, rather intended to give the appearance of supporting
peace and forcing Palestinians to reject these ideas so they appear the
spoilers. More than anything, the lack of seriousness comes through in
ideas so full of contradictions, stipulations and demands that they are
too vague to agree on, much less comply with.

How can there be a Palestinian state as long as settlement activity
continues? Is it reasonable to impose a system of governance and
administration upon the Palestinians, when doing so may be intended to
meet Israeli goals before Palestinian vital interests? How can
Palestinians meet Israeli demands if the Israeli government is the party
determining Palestinian compliance, and with the knowledge that this
government does not want to progress to the next stage?

The government's guidelines stipulate agreement on a Palestinian state,
at the same time that the right wing parties are loudly announcing in
the media that they will not agree to a Palestinian state west of the
Jordan river. In only one example, the National Union party headed by
Avigdor Lieberman has stated repeatedly that it "opposes the
establishment of a Palestinian state west of the Jordan river no matter
what its borders."

Even stranger is that the leaders of this government opposed the Oslo
accords, did everything to invalidate them, and succeeded to a large
degree. Now they are proposing a peace between the two sides that has
many of the same characteristics of the Oslo accords. Is their intention
simply to change the accords in name, since the old name is connected to
the Labor Party and President Yasser Arafat? Or is the goal to start
over and stall, imposing new facts on the ground that will preclude the
establishment of a Palestinian state?

Following World War II, the most extensive war in the history of
mankind, there were hundreds of peace settlements and agreements signed
in the short period of two years. By contrast, Israel has imposed on
Palestinians negotiations now lasting over a decade that have still not
solved the problem of a piece of land one millionth of the global land
mass that participated in World War II. On the contrary, Sharon and his
government have returned the problem to square one and ignored the last
decade of talks. Here one must ask--how much time do the two sides need
to negotiate before the conflict is finally put to an end?

I believe that the fundamental flaw in the Oslo accords was the
principle of a stage-based solution to the conflict. The waiting factor
and fear produced by very slow talks have increased the anxiety of both
Palestinians and Israelis. The arena has been opened up to those who
oppose any settlement at all, placing both Israeli and Palestinian
societies in a position of anticipation, tension and apprehension, as
they interpret any act of violence as dissolving the glimmer of change
ahead.

What is strange is that Israeli and American politicians have apparently
not learned the lessons of Oslo, as it seems that they are soon to
repeat the same mistakes. In my view, the solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict will ultimately cause sharp pain to both
peoples, just as labor pains or a toothache cause brief severe pain
before the body returns to normal. This conflict must be dealt with in
one blow, because a stage-based solution means continuous agony for
months and years on end.

Most of the members of the current Israeli government don't want to
begin peace negotiations before teaching Palestinians a lesson they
won't forget, so they don't return again to revolution and Intifada. But
the Israeli leaders must remember that Israel has crushed Palestinians
many times in the past and yet they always returned quickly to
revolution. This doesn't mean that the Palestinians are stupid or slow
to understand, it is simply that the great injustice done to them in
1948 far outweighs the pain of revolution.

I believe that every few years, the Palestinian people will return to
revolution and Intifada--just as they always have--as long as their
cause is not handled justly and humanely. What will Sharon's new
government accomplish if the Palestinian people--who now make up half
the population of Mandatory Palestine--quiet down? Will they disappear
from the face of the earth, or will they force future Israeli
governments to accept a democratic bi-national state? Isn't this the
solution that Palestinians have advocated for decades, one Israel
rejects out of hand to this day?

