For almost four decades, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat has dominated
the Palestinian national movement. Arafat himself, and his kuffiyeh,
beard and khaki clothes, have all come to epitomize the Palestinian
people and their national struggle. It is he who has determined the
traits and direction of the fight with Israel and this longevity despite
one obstacle after the other is not only due to Arafat's charismatic
character and good luck, but also to his strategic instinct and tactical
ingenuity.

Arafat's strategic will to survive revolves around three interrelated
areas. These are: self-preservation; preventing the dissipation of the
Palestinian cause; and the achievement of real gains for the Palestinian
people on the land of Palestine (it is often said that Arafat likes to
compare himself to Haj Amin Husseini, in that he, too, desires to leave
behind tangible and concrete accomplishments for the Palestinian people,
however limited).

Tactically, Arafat is a master. He will do whatever it takes to maintain
his hold on the reigns. For this reason, Arafat early on realized the
importance of controlling money and the media. He has commanded them and
used them to achieve his tactical purposes and strategic goals. Although
Arafat is possessive and has authoritarian inclinations, he is not a
dictator.

Instead, from the beginning Abu Ammar has been pragmatic, able to talk
and willing to maneuver. He has also been willing to offer the necessary
concessions even when they came too late, burdened the Palestinian
people and cost them heavily. Still, Arafat has never been dogmatic. He
understands his limits and has tried to stretch those limits, with
varying success. At the moment it appears that he is trying to stretch
those limits farther than they can handle.

As a pragmatist, Arafat has been conciliatory and not dismissive.
Although he always made political decisions on his own, he tried to make
these decisions by preserving legal frameworks and appeasing the
political factions, powerful people and VIPs around him. In turn, this
meant he was always the center of an internal polarization that
led--among other things--to Arafat's turning a blind eye to great
excesses. There have been double standards in policies, which reaped
corruption and the buyout of personal interests. Palestinian public
finances reflect this situation (by no means a problem particular to
Palestinians, but one that is growing).

In short, Abu Ammar has always constituted the compass among
Palestinians for determining what is possible. He has worked to expand
possibilities and whatever internal problems this caused for him, he
always patched things up with incredible conciliatory talents. While he
could not be diverted from his aims, his conciliation guaranteed him a
satisfactory level of acceptance and loyalty among Palestinians. Hidden
within this cycle are an amalgam of internal dysfunctions and problems
that continue to multiply. This is the anomaly--troublesome, but enduring.

The Palestinian condition is desperate and complex. In a region where
ultimate pride lies in statehood and a world deeply involved in the Cold
War, Abu Ammar set off on a national liberation movement, using all of
his tactical abilities, political pragmatism and conciliatory talents.
Despite the tremendous difficulties he faced internally, regionally and
internationally, he has always able to maneuver and create the allies
needed for his survival. He adapted himself to change and moved from one
phase to the next absorbing every loss as if it were a victory.

In this fashion, Arafat was able to paint himself as the one and only
leader of the Palestinians, imposing himself not only on the region, but
on the entire world. He was able (as he always says of the Palestinians)
to impose himself as an indispensable quantity necessary in every
equation related to the fate of this region or others. Arafat has,
therefore, achieved his first two goals of survival and the preservation
of the Palestinian cause. Now he must produce the third component of
lasting results in order to secure his place in history.

Despite repeated political concessions (in 1969, 1974, 1979, 1988), the
world has not yet allowed Arafat to achieve this last component. That
was his goal when he lay the groundwork for a Palestinian state. He
realized the price that would be paid, but thought, as always, that once
he put down the first bricks, the building would grow.

Abu Ammar was able to maneuver much and expand the patch of land under
the Palestinian National Authority little. But he was not able to expand
his political abilities into achieving the aspired-for Palestinian state.

Until, of course, Ehud Barak came to power in Israel. After the
assassination of the skeptic Rabin, and the tenure of a hesitant Peres
and loud-mouthed Netanyahu, Barak began talking about a comprehensive
deal that would result in a Palestinian state. Arafat (now over 70 years
old) was the closest that had ever been to his last goal. Still, Barak
demanded one condition--an end to the conflict.

As usual, Arafat tried to maneuver. But Barak refused and, with active
American help, he trapped Arafat. His offer to accept a Palestinian
state came with a number of conditions, most importantly, those related
to Jerusalem and the refugees. Arafat rejected the offer at face value,
but not in essence. He wanted Barak to come back with something better.
But Barak did not really want to reach a settlement and instead burned
himself out politically. He and Clinton painted a negative picture of
Arafat and international support for Palestinians began to crumble.

The situation called for a Palestinian uprising and it came. But with
it, it brought Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. The two bitter
enemies met again and the conflict, previously camouflaged by the peace
process, rose to the surface and exploded.

Sharon's personal vendetta against Arafat and political objections to
the Palestinian cause are married together. As such, Sharon launched an
escalating systematic campaign to eliminate the possibility that the
Palestinian Authority would become an independent state, preferring a
framework of autonomy under Israeli sovereignty. At the same time, he
began to politically strangle Arafat, weakening him towards
collapse--either by forcing him to carry out Israeli demands to act as
an Israeli tool, or by bringing him down.

Arafat is trying to use all his tactical talents in maneuvering with
Sharon to get out of the present crisis. But the situation, internally,
regionally and worldwide, does not leave him much leeway. Rather, he is
only facing more pressure. In light of a disintegrating relationship
with the Arab world, Arafat has lost all of what he needs to move. What
is required of him exceeds the limits of his pragmatism and his ability
to justify compromise.

As such, Arafat has come back to defending, not the last of his three
strategic components, but the first--his own leadership. It is a battle
that will determine his own fate, and therefore, the future of the
Palestinian cause.

