The broad, one might say sweeping, movement for building a separation
fence, "tens of meters high, so that I won't ever see them again," in
the words of one interviewee on Israel national television, last week
even co-opted the institution that by all ideological and political
logic should have been the most aggressive and most vocal opponent of
separation: the settlement movement. In an Israel Radio broadcast on
June 6, 2002--the day Israel conquered, 35 years ago, northern Samaria
where Benzi Lieberman, the Chairman of the Council of Settlers in Judea,
Samaria and Gaza [known by it acronym, "Yesha Council"],
lives--Lieberman announced that the Council, the premier institution of
the settlers, would not oppose (any longer) the construction of a fence
that will separate the State of Israel from the body of settlements to
the east, including Jewish settlements.

Is this the policy of the Yesha Council? Do the settlers whom Lieberman
represents really want to be separated from the rest of the Jews inside
Israel? Don't they understand that separation begins as a functional
act, then becomes conscious separation, wherein the settlements of
Samaria and Judea are seen as a separate entity in all senses of the
word, and ultimately renders it easier to enact political separation?
The Yesha Council's acquiescence in a separation fence reflects--even
more than the acquiescence of politicians who ostensibly have to satisfy
public opinion--the mental state that has gripped the vast majority of
Israelis for some 21 months since Chairman Yasir Arafat initiated a
terror war that has succeeded in wearing them down. The Yesha Council,
seeking somehow to bridge the disconnect that divides it from most of
the frightened public (some of whom actually believe that vicious
terrorist attacks are being carried out because of the settlements),
feels obliged to cease swimming against the current. And "if the mighty
have succumbed, how shall the weak emerge unscathed?"

The first Israelis to demand the construction of a fence for physical
separation, as high and thick as possible, between Israel and the
Palestinians, were paradoxically the heads of the Labor Party, men and
women of peace; they who signed the Oslo agreement with Yasir Arafat,
which was supposed to put an end to all the bloodshed and render any
physical barrier superfluous. And after Haim Ramon, Ephraim Sneh and
Binyamin Ben-Eliezer, minister of defense and head of the Labor Party,
came the Likud ministers too. Surprisingly, these include Minister of
Internal Security Uzi Landau, an adherent of the Greater Land of Israel.
Finally, as public pressure built up, they were joined by Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon.

This is indeed astonishing: Sharon, in character, substance, military
practice and even political inclination, takes the offensive. He has
always sought to decide a conflict by attacking and overwhelming.
Defensive trench warfare, he used to say, is costly in both human and
budgetary terms. In particular, the defending side never wins. It is the
initiator, who enjoys mobility, who always has the advantage. During the
War of Attrition launched by Egypt in 1968 Sharon opposed construction
of the Bar Lev Line of fortified emplacements along the Suez Canal. When
the line eventually collapsed in 1973 Sharon took his detractors to task
very pointedly. Yet here he is in the position of supreme decisionmaker,
altering the concept he held his entire life. He has accepted--perhaps
surrendered to--the completely pessimistic mood sweeping Israeli public
opinion.

He knows what the results of the separation fence will be: the de facto
determination of the border between Israel and the Palestinian state
along the Green Line, without Arafat even ceasing his terrorism. And if
Arafat achieves this prize of the Green Line without a ceasefire, why
should he stop the violence afterwards, since the Jews have demonstrated
to him that [Hizballah leader] Nasrallah's spider web formula works,
despite the achievements of Operation Defensive Shield.

The Bar Lev Line along the banks of the Suez Canal was constructed
hundreds of kilometers from Israeli population centers. The "Sharon
Line" is being built by Ariel Sharon within rifle and machine gun
distance from Israeli cities and villages like Kfar Sava and Kochav
Yair, where hundreds of thousands of Israelis live. Judging by its
sweeping support for a separation fence (over 80 percent), Israel has
despaired, at least for the foreseeable future, of achieving any kind of
agreement with the Palestinians. Accordingly the terrorist attacks among
the Jewish population of Israel and the settlements, especially the
suicide attacks, will not cease. And the settlers, following Ariel
Sharon, are lending their support to a step that will not bring peace
and, certainly in the long term, will not bring security, and which
demonstrates to the Arabs, like after our flight from Lebanon, that
terrorism pays. And how it pays!

