The June 5 suicide bombing of a bus near Megiddo in northern Israel in
which 17 Israelis were killed was typical. First a car was stolen in Lod
and driven across the Green Line into the West Bank. There it was fitted
with explosives. Then, on the appointed day, it was driven back into
Israel and exploded next to the bus. The ease with which Palestinian
terrorists can drive stolen cars across the Green Line is of course
indicative of the ease with which suicide bombers can cross this border
on foot. It is a scandal.

Yet in the course of many long months of repeated suicide bombings the
Sharon government refused to take the obvious minimal step needed to
protect 97 percent of its citizens who live within the Green Line. It
clearly feared that the building of physical barriers along the Green
Line would have negative ramifications for the viability of the
settlements housing the remaining 3 percent of Israelis who live beyond
the Green Line, in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. In other words, the
government feared that the fence would become the de facto political
border.

Now, hundreds of deaths later, Prime Minister Sharon and Defense
Minister Ben Eliezer have acquiesced. In view of the immense popularity
of the fence idea among the public, coupled with their own fear of
popular disapproval if they continue to neglect the public's most
fundamental welfare, they have undertaken to build fences and walls on
or near the Green Line--initially in the most vulnerable areas in the
north and center of the country, and eventually everywhere.

Yet the concept of separation by fences is far more complex than it may
appear initially.

Militarily, fences and walls will have no effect on mortar or rocket
attacks launched from the West Bank against Israel, and little effect
against determined aggressive intruders unless the fences are patrolled.
But the forces needed to patrol them are busy guarding the settlements,
particularly those located in the midst of large Palestinian population
concentrations in Gaza and the West Bank heartland. Hence many of the
grassroots advocates of fences, led by the Council for Peace and
Security, insist that their construction be accompanied by unilateral
withdrawal from these settlements, first and foremost in order to free
up forces for a more orderly and efficient effort to protect Israel
against suicide bombers. The fence would then be designed so as to
comprise the settlement blocs located near the Green Line, thereby
protecting some 70 percent of the settlers as well. While the public
supports this idea, most of the political parties currently represented
in the Knesset do not. Thus there is little likelihood that settlements
will be dismantled in the near future, thereby somewhat limiting the
military utility of the fence.

In this regard, it is important to note the example of the Gaza Strip.
The Gaza-Israel border, some 45 kilometers long, has been fenced for
around 10 years. Not a single suicide bomber has penetrated it into
Israel. But the settlements located inside the Strip remain vulnerable
to attack, and require large contingents of troops to patrol them.

The fence will have heavy ramifications for Palestinians, too.
Politically, they will attack the idea. Militarily, they may interpret
dismantling of settlements as a sign of Israeli weakness. Economically,
illegal commuters will be barred from work in Israel.

As for the ramifications for peace, some advocates of separation, like
Labor's Haim Ramon, in effect seek to present the line delineated by the
fencing of the Green Line together with the settlement blocs as a de
facto political border. Others point out that, even after dismantling
isolated settlements, Israel will hold onto the Jordan Valley for
strategic security reasons, as well as Greater Jerusalem, which cannot
be rationally "separated" by fences, pending final status negotiations
in which all the land of the West Bank will be on the table. According
to this position, unilateral withdrawal and the building of fences
should not be confused with the drawing of borders. In any case, most
advocates of separation now assert, convincingly, that Israel does not
currently have a peace partner on the Palestinian side, and must
therefore act unilaterally in accordance with its own needs.

Finally, the demographic issue. The dismantling of outlying settlements
in Gaza and the West Bank heartland could literally rescue Israel from
impending demographic disaster. The settlers, with the loftiest of
Zionist motives for redeeming the Land, are increasingly plunging Israel
into a South African situation, with the Area A Palestinian cities
filling the roll of Bantustans, and an Arab majority between the
Mediterranean and the Jordan River a matter of a few more years. The
more settlements are built and the more Palestinians are born, the more
difficult will be the inevitable effort to disentangle us from this
threat. Building fences--despite their drawbacks--will hopefully
catalyze a process of demographic security as well as enhanced physical
security.

