Israeli officials are reported to debate extensively the best possible
plans for securing their citizens and boundaries. The media covers these
discussions, including the daily incursions into Palestinian towns and
cities, the time period and intensity of force needed. Usually, we are
told, the controversy is over whether to occupy all or part of the
territory, "isolate" or remove Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, as well
as how to create the conditions needed for negotiation.

There is no controversy, however, that puts a dent in the nearly
unanimous feeling of Israelis that the reason for these military actions
is to defend both Israel and the Israeli people. While some individual
"mistakes" are acknowledged here and there, the majority of Israeli
officials continue to dodge the questions "where are the lands of
Israel?" and "what are Israelis doing in the occupied territories?"

Under cover of these discussions, the Israeli government has initiated
the first steps in creating an isolation wall. Thousands of dunums of
land are being expropriated from Palestinians for that purpose and the
final plans are to be completed within 24 months. After that time
period, Palestinians will be living in their own ghettos, unable to
leave and only partially accessible. According to these plans, it
appears that the current government in Israel would redefine the
boundaries of the state to be everything outside and around Palestinian
cantons. These cantons will only be allowed vital needs. Should the
Palestinians then declare these cantons their state or empire will then
prove irrelevant.

There are some crucial steps that must be taken in order to facilitate
widespread acceptance of this final resolution. These steps, already
begun, include the subjecting of Palestinians to a system of closures
and permits to move that are unprecedented, even when compared to those
of former South Africa. The result is to make the daily lives of
Palestinians an inexhaustible source of ordeal and uncertainty.

Following are some excerpted affidavits collected from Palestinians:

* ...I am the father of Aya, 12 years old, and Hanin, 10. Both have
Thalassemia and require blood transfusions at Ramallah Hospital at least
once a month. For the past month, even the alternative dirt roads have
been blocked, not even ambulances are allowed to reach the nearest
checkpoint...I do not know what to do... (Amin Masoud from Der Ammar
village, usually a 20-minute drive from Ramallah)

* Samar Tawfiq, 31 years old...Had bleeding in her ninth month of
pregnancy. Was delayed for more than four hours before finally reaching
Rafidia Hospital. The woman's life was saved but the baby died... (from
Beit Furik Village, seven kilometers from Rafidia Hospital in Nablus)

* ...My father had earlier in the day tried to take my sister Aisha, who
suffers from renal failure, to Ramallah Hospital. She is required to
undergo dialysis three times a week. His efforts to talk to the soldiers
at the checkpoint proved futile. They even started shooting...later that
afternoon, as her condition deteriorated, I tried to take her out again
using a different route, but the soldiers would not allow us anywhere
near them...An ambulance was also unable to come to the checkpoint...we
had to go back and later that evening, my sister died... (Amjad Ali, the
brother of Aisha Ali from the village of Qibya, normally a 20 minute
drive from Ramallah)

These are only excerpts from only a few sample cases collected by
lawyers and field workers at the Jerusalem Legal Aid Center--only one
Palestinian human rights group. They were collected in the hopes that
these voices would be heard and that the United Nations Secretary
General or High Commissioner might find time or courage to speak up
against these acts that can only be termed "crimes of war." They were
collected in the hope that signatories to the UN Charter remember what
that Charter was all about. In the hope that all this might have an end.

Unfortunately, these cases are those of the common people. No statistics
count them and their daily lives are on no one's priority list. These
are the people that Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon says must be
thoroughly beaten before they accept their fate.

When human rights groups have petitioned representatives of the world's
"most humane army" on behalf of Palestinians with illnesses who must get
past Sharon's walls, the army responded that these people can apply for
travel permits from Bet El military administration center near Ramallah.
But if these people cannot even get to the next town, how then can they
apply at Beit El?

More cynical yet are official responses to complaints that the army is
preventing medical aid or movement in contravention with the Fourth
Geneva Convention or humanitarian law. The army has responded that this
situation is a result of Palestinian violence and, therefore, that the
referenced conventions do not apply due to the nature of the armed
conflict. It is as if the Geneva Convention was intended to apply in
times of peace rather than in war!

All of these fences are not aimed at protecting the Israeli citizen, but
rather fulfilling the ingenious criminal fantasies of Prime Minister
Sharon. They have not succeeded in foiling even one suicide bombing, but
provide motive and the desire for revenge for hundreds more.

As this policy continues, beyond the fence will lie more than three
million Palestinians held captive in the newest racial segregation
system in the world.

