Q: What was Gaza residents' impression of Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon's "unilateral disengagement plan" prior to his
party's vote against it?

A: The moment Sharon presented his unilateral disengagement
plan, all types of Palestinians on all levels, political and public,
began to think about the expected withdrawal and to prepare their
future, believing that if the settlements were evacuated and if the
Israeli army pulled out, then their lives would be much easier than they
are now.

They were dreaming, and unfortunately Sharon and the Likud party made
this dream a nightmare. The suffering of the people in Gaza is mounting
day after day, with the building of a new barrier in the central Gaza
Strip that cuts the Gaza Strip into two near the junction of Kissufim
(what the Palestinians call Abu Holi), the junction leading to the
Jewish settlement compound of Gush Katif. What has made Palestinian life
even harder beyond the previous measures of closure imposed on the Gaza
Strip for more than three years is that people are currently unable to
travel abroad. Israel has issued a new security order saying that
Palestinians aged 16 to 35 cannot leave the Gaza Strip "for security
reasons." Also, it has shut down the Erez crossing in the northern Gaza
Strip. All of these difficulties intensified after Ariel Sharon began to
talk about his unilateral disengagement plan.

Q: What was the reaction of the Gaza political leadership?

A: All factions, including Fateh, the largest faction in the
Palestine Liberation Organization, and Palestinian Authority officials,
agreed that they should be united in the event of an Israeli army
pullout and evacuation of the settlements. For example, before Ahmad
Yassin, the spiritual leader and founder of Hamas, and his successor Dr.
Abdel Aziz Rantisi were assassinated by Israel, Hamas accepted the plan
in principle and began to prepare the ground for post-pullout and
evacuation.

You might say it was like waiting for Godot. But Sharon used his plan
only to gain more political achievements for himself, his party and the
state of Israel.

Q: Exactly what kind of agreement were the factions trying
to reach?

A: The factions began to change their strategies and change
their ideologies, in fact. They wanted to disprove what the Israeli
media was saying, which was that Hamas and Islamic Jihad would take over
the Jewish settlements that were to be evacuated in the Gaza Strip.
Hamas and Islamic Jihad leaders were announcing in the media that they
did not seek to take control of the Jewish settlements, that they were
not greedy, but that we [Palestinians] should all be united in governing
and controlling Gaza. But everything was turned upside down, two leaders
of Hamas were assassinated, and all of the movements, Islamic and
national, are currently in a state of depression and disappointment.

Q: But would the factions have succeeded in creating a
unified position?

A: If Sharon was serious about implementing his plan as soon
as possible, they would immediately renew their dialogue. In fact, Hamas
itself announced many times that in the event of a pullout from the Gaza
Strip, it would have no objections to join in the Palestinian Authority,
to be part of the Palestine Liberation Organization executive committee.
Letters were exchanged between Khaled Mashaal in Damascus and Yasser
Arafat in Ramallah. Those letters spoke of Hamas' acceptance to join the
PLO after an Israeli army pullout from Gaza.

Q: Does the Likud vote mean the end of the plan?

A: Many Palestinians believe that Sharon was never really
serious. He knew in advance that the Likud party, with its great
influence on the Israeli government, would oppose it completely. He made
use of this plan to gain more achievements and get financial aid from
the United States.

This is the first time in the history of the Palestinian question that
the United States president has legalized Jewish settlements built on
Palestinian property in the West Bank. This is the first time that any
US president has spoken of canceling the right of return for Palestinian
refugees. He said that any Palestinian refugee who wants to return,
should return to the Palestinian state. Which Palestinian state is
George Bush talking about? The state of Gaza? Gaza already has 1.5
million people and would never be able to absorb another half a million
Palestinian refugees. They would never accept to return to Gaza.

Sharon wanted the number one man in the world to cancel the right of
return of the refugees. He cancelled Security Council resolutions that
gave Palestinians the right of return, the right to establish a
Palestinian state and the right to struggle against the occupation. That
was the aim of presenting such a false unilateral plan.

Q: In the short term, then, what do you think will happen?

A: The intifada is going to continue. Attacks will be
resumed against Israel. But the thing that worries Palestinians and
President Arafat personally is that the price of any suicide bombing
attack carried out by any Palestinian faction inside Israel will be
Yasser Arafat--either his head or his deportation to Gaza, what Israelis
refer to as the "big garbage can of the Gaza Strip." I believe that all
factions are united on this point [and are acting to prevent this].

Q: Doesn't the lack of response weaken Hamas?

A: Hamas leaders admitted that the assassination of Yassin
and Rantisi severely weakened the movement. But this might also be a
tactic. First, Hamas does not want the price [of its revenge] to be
Yasser Arafat because it needs him at this particular time. Second, a
Hamas leader released a few days ago from an Israeli jail was saying
that Hamas is planning a big earth-shattering attack to avenge the
deaths of Yassin and Rantisi and other Palestinians. In other words,
Hamas is only waiting for the right time.

