Paradoxically, as in the Palestinian Authority's first elections in
January 1996, the current elections for the leader of the PA, held
exactly nine years later, generated little interest among the Israeli
public. This indifference must surprise outside observers; ostensibly,
Israelis should be paying greater attention to elections on the
Palestinian side. After all, not only will the elections determine who
leads the PA in the coming years--hence, whether it seeks peace or more
armed struggle; but well run elections can testify to the PA's capacity
to govern and to the deep roots sunk there by democracy in the
post-Arafat era.

Two key factors can apparently explain this seemingly strange
disinterest. The first derives from the attitude of the average Israeli
Jewish citizen to events on the Palestinian side in general, and the
second is linked specifically to the current elections.

In the old days, many Israeli boys and girls used to inscribe one
another's autograph books "between you and me, a kilometer, between my
heart and yours, a millimeter". The ties between the Israeli Jewish
public and the Palestinians are the reverse: the geographic distance is
small, while the emotional and cognitive distance is huge.
Metaphorically we might say that the wall of consciousness is much
higher and more impervious than the concrete and steel of the separation
fence.

The few small fissures in the wall of consciousness are usually opened
by negative events, particularly terrorist attacks. Immediately after a
traumatic mass attack there is a brief burst of Israeli interest in the
perpetrator, his/her environment and the operatives who dispatched
him/her. But as the shock passes, interest in what is happening "across
the border" dissipates too--interest that has practically ceased to
exist since the green line was effectively erased. Particularly
successful "targeted killings" or IDF attacks that take a heavy toll on
the Palestinian population also here and there generate a hurried
glance, mainly by the media, at what is happening on the other side.

But broadly speaking, the average Israeli Jew takes an interest in
events among the Palestinians only when they are linked to issues of
security. The majority doesn't know and is not interested in knowing the
facts about the Palestinian side or its feelings. Only a few Israeli
Jews can cite the names of PA administrators or Palestinian journalists,
authors, singers, businessmen or "celebrities", unless they have played
a prominent role in peace negotiations with Israel or, to the contrary,
are notorious for the perpetration of or support for terrorist activities.

Against this backdrop, no wonder the elections, too, were seen as an
"internal Palestinian affair", particularly when informed analysis
indicated that the winner was known in advance and from the Israeli
standpoint he was the preferred choice.

In contrast to Yasser Arafat, who with a few short exceptions symbolized
for the vast majority of Jewish Israelis the "bad Palestinian", Abu
Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas) is considered, justifiably or not, the "good
Palestinian". Both in a previous round, when he was appointed prime
minister through American and Israeli pressure with the objective of
carrying out "reform" that would weaken Arafat, and in his rise to the
senior leadership position following the death of the "father" of the
Palestinian nation, the prevalent view in Israel is that he is "good for
the Jews". The Israeli media covered his election campaign in a positive
manner, and usually highlighted those campaign themes that the Israeli
Jewish public could "live with". Even when Abu Mazen repeated almost
without exception Arafat's nationalist credo and vowed to honor his
legacy--including the establishment of the capital of Palestine in
Jerusalem and the refusal to renounce the right of return--the Israeli
public's "take" was that this represented little more than an electoral
strategy. It is not a substantive position that must be taken seriously,
nor should it be a source of concern in a way that Arafat's
uncompromising positions were understood (see the Steinmetz Center's
Peace Index for November 2004).

Further, since it was clear who the leading candidate was, the Israeli
leadership disseminated an "everything will be fine" atmosphere. This
helped generate disinterest among the public, which in any case is
preoccupied with the question of disengagement and its domestic
ramifications. Presumably, had the current elections taken place in the
context of assessments that a different candidate stood a chance of
winning, particularly one genuinely hostile toward Israel, say from
Hamas, then tensions would have risen on the Israeli side, together with
greater interest in the PA elections.

The fact that the identity of the winner was known in advance was also
grasped by Israelis as an indication that this was not a truly
democratic process, and that these elections did not constitute a
turning point in the authoritarian (some would add, corrupt) nature of
the Palestinian Authority. Hence the elections were seen more as the
inaugural ceremony for a perhaps anemic but quite friendly successor.
All that remains is to wait and see whether he acts as anticipated in
terms of establishing his authority over the organizations that are
hostile to Israel, and returning to the negotiating table.

