Ariel Sharon has established a new government that is ostensibly based
on a profound disagreement over the key issue it confronts: the eventual
emergence of a Palestinian state. Accordingly, Sharon is either not
serious about the issue and never intends to oversee the creation of a
Palestinian state on less than 50 percent of the territory; or he
intends to dismantle this government and replace it with a more
left-leaning one, if and when the time comes and a Palestinian state
becomes a reality.

In this regard, the key clause in the new government's guidelines is the
one that opens the section on "Security, peace and settlement." It
states that "the parties to this coalition decided to act in concert. .
. despite the fact that each continues to adhere to its positions of
principle. . . regarding settlement and. . . the nature and conditions
of final status arrangements." When taken together with the side
agreements and letters of reservation in which the National Religious
Party and the National Union take their distance from even the paltry
mosaic of enclaves that Sharon is promoting as a Palestinian state, this
rather extraordinary disclaimer can only indicate that the prime
minister does not expect this particular coalition to accomplish
anything in terms of political progress with the Palestinians.

The guidelines go on to point to the second document that is key to
understanding Sharon's approach to the Palestinian issue. Section 2.6 of
the guidelines states: "the government's activities in the political
arena will be guided by the principles presented by the prime minister
to the public prior to the elections (including the principles of the
prime minister's speech at the "Herzliya Conference" of December 4,
2002). Prior to active negotiations over a political solution, if it
comprises the establishment of a Palestinian state, the subject will be
presented for discussion and decision by the government."

The Herzliya speech is a summary of Sharon's approach to the roadmap and
to United States President Bush's June 24, 2002 speech:

* "The only way to achieve a true peace agreement with the Palestinians
is progress in phases, with the first phase being a complete cessation
of terror." * "Progress [from phase to phase] is determined on the basis
of performance." * "The achievement of true coexistence must be carried
out, first and foremost, by the replacement of the Palestinian
leadership. . . . no progress will be possible with Arafat." * "Parallel
with, and perhaps even prior to the governmental reforms, a security
reform will be carried out." * The second phase of President Bush's
sequence proposes the establishment of a Palestinian state with borders
yet to be finalized, and which will overlap with territories A and B,
except for essential security zones." * "In the final phase. . .
negotiations will be opened to determine the final status of the
Palestinian state and fix its permanent borders."

The second and third phases outlined by Sharon in the Herzliya speech
are the principles that the two extreme right wing parties in Sharon's
government do not agree with. Notably, nowhere does that speech mention
the dismantling of settlements, while the guidelines present a
settlement freeze in such murky language that the NRP, the party of the
settlers, felt comfortable endorsing it. Hence it is doubtful that, as
anticipated by the guidelines, an effort at "discussion and decision"
regarding phases two and three will indeed take place, since it is hard
to imagine any Palestinian government accepting Sharon's version of the
roadmap and agreeing to negotiate over the implementation of an
open-ended rump state in "territories A and B, except for essential
security zones", i.e., in even less than 42 percent of the West Bank.

Conceivably, Sharon believes that this is not the case; that a new
Palestinian leadership will indeed ultimately be obliged to negotiate on
his terms, at which point he will if necessary seek to form an
alternative government. After all, this is what he believed when he
sought, abortively, to establish the collaborationist Village Leagues in
1981 and the Jumayil government in Lebanon in 1982, and this is where he
appears to be heading with the gradual reoccupation of the Gaza Strip.

This is a formula for prolonged stalemate--or worse--throughout the
coming months and years. Meanwhile Sharon's obliging radical right
coalition partners, to which he gladly gave control over the housing and
transportation ministries, will build more settlements and bypass roads,
thereby further interlocking Jews and Arabs (the latter soon to be the
majority) both geographically and demographically throughout the
Promised Land.

Willy nilly, this government will take another step toward the demise of
Israel as a Jewish and democratic state.

