The end of a successful presidential election day in Palestine entails a
number of significant consequences.

Firstly, the Palestinian people and leadership, in spite of the
difficult circumstances created by the occupation, have proven
themselves eager, willing and able to practice proper democratic elections.

The obstacles created by the occupation were several, including the
Israeli restrictions against voting in East Jerusalem, the shooting by
Israelis at one polling station in Gaza, the delay in the arrival of
some ballot boxes to some villages, and the negative political and
security atmosphere created by the Israeli escalation in the few days
before the elections.

But Israel was not the only source of outside meddling. Some Arab
satellite TV stations overtly interfered in the race in the last few
days before elections including by trying to negatively influence the
position of Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen). There was also interference with
regard to the financing of campaigns from the outside, including from
governments.

Despite the above, the elections took place peacefully and in an orderly
manner in spite of the relative absence of any proper security due to
the general political situation as a result of the occupation.

The comfortable majority that Abu Mazen won on the basis of the very
clear political program that he was campaigning on, is also a message of
peace from the Palestinian people and leadership. It is a message that
the Palestinians are willing to give a chance to efforts to replace the
ongoing violent confrontations between the two sides with political
negotiations. The question now is, what is going to be the response from
Israel and from the third parties, particularly the US?

The election results have created a window of opportunity that will
remain open roughly until the end of the year. During this time, the
Palestinian people will be busy preparing for the Legislative Council
elections, which should take place in the middle of the year. By then,
the Palestinian side will have successfully fulfilled most if not all of
its obligations under the first phase of the roadmap. These include
advancing and enhancing the process of reforms--a process that has
already been termed satisfactory by the report of the international task
force presented recently--conducting free and democratic elections, and
consolidating the Palestinian security system into three organs under an
empowered prime minister. The latter is a process that is now well
underway with the recent Cabinet approval of a law to this effect that
has now been submitted to the PLC. In addition, the PA will be making a
one hundred percent effort to try to stop any Palestinian violence
against Israelis.

In order to preserve and utilize the momentum created by this election,
however, Israel is also required to fulfill its obligations under the
first phase of the roadmap. These include stopping all kinds of
settlement expansions, removing all restrictions and other economic
sanctions and collective punishment measures against the Palestinian
people and economy, and finally, stopping all kinds of violence against
Palestinians.

The best mechanism for fulfilling the security obligations on both sides
might be a willingness to agree to a mutual ceasefire. Should Israel
choose this practical political path, it will enhance the positive
developments on the Palestinian side, empower the new leadership and
enable it to succeed in its own security mission.

However, such Israeli reciprocity should not be expected without serious
third party intervention. The elections therefore are also a strong
invitation to the US to move concertedly to bring the two sides back to
negotiations based on the international legality embodied in the
roadmap. The US is urged to bring Israel to the table and ensure Israeli
compliance with the specific obligations under the first phase of the
roadmap. If this year should end without Abbas being able to show his
public that he is moving them closer to their objective of ending the
occupation and has had some success in addressing the issues of poverty
and unemployment, then he is headed for the same fate that he met when
he served as prime minister.

Finally, two significant side effects of this democratic experience in
Palestine are that it sets an example to fellow Arab countries in the
region, and shows that democracy can be neither imported nor exported,
that it depends instead on the presence of internal will and
infrastructure. The success of the Palestinian elections should
encourage genuine democratic elements in the Arab world and weaken the
opponents of democracy, and I think what happened here will encourage
positive developments in this direction in the region as a whole.

