The recent formation of the Israeli government is not news, by any
means. Like the election results, it more or less reproduces the
previous Likud-led government, only minus the left-of-center Labor
Party. As such, this government is going to be the most right wing and
extreme in all of Israel's history.

From a Palestinian perspective, there are many reasons why this
government is very dangerous. First and foremost, its composition
includes the Likud and other parties that are to the right of the Likud,
dominated by the personality of Ariel Sharon who has shown himself
extremely hostile to the historical compromises negotiated in Madrid and
Olso, and also to the relevant international law that has so far formed
the basis of the peace process. Some of Sharon's coalition partners are
even more extremist than he in this regard, and in the warped political
prism of today, actually make him appear moderate.

The second reason this government is dangerous is that it coincides with
an American administration that is also right wing and in some ways
fundamentalist, adopting positions vis a vis the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict that are comparatively the most biased positions and attitudes
that we have seen from the US since the conflict began. The United
States is the only country that has leverage over Israel, and therefore
the joining of this Israeli government hand-in-hand with this particular
US administration is an explosive mix--one encouraging the hostile and
aggressive attitudes of the Israeli government, and ultimately very
dangerous for Palestinians and the prospects for peace.

It is no coincidence that this Israeli government comes to power at a
time when Palestinian extremist groups are also on the rise. These
groups actively oppose the peace process, and their activities
(especially attacks against Israeli civilians inside Israel that have
been condemned by the Palestinian Authority) are providing this
right-wing Israeli government the justification, ammunition and
reinforcement for its violent policies. (And of course, the converse is
also true: Israeli aggression against Palestinian civilians is
strengthening the Palestinian opposition.) In other words, extremism is
the name of the game, as the activities of Palestinian opposition groups
gain momentum under the intense attacks of this Israeli government.

All of this occurs as the region approaches a war in Iraq, thus
magnifying the dangers before us. While very few Palestinians are
worried about the direct consequences of an Iraq war, we are all very
concerned that this war will be exploited to increase the atrocities
carried out against the Palestinian people and their leadership.

As such, this Israeli government comes as no surprise, but does bring
with it significant warning alarms for the Palestinian people. Not only
do we see before us grave dangers, but we are almost certain that this
government will leave no opportunity for the resumption of the peace
process. Its dominant ideology is deeply incompatible with the
international legal requirements for peace, in particular the very heart
of compromise: the exchange of land for peace. This government not only
shuns that spirit, but is wholeheartedly and daily engaged in the
process of consolidating its military occupation on Palestinian
land.

