It was striking to watch a TV clip of Ariel Sharon consoling the family
of Tali Hatuel and her four daughters, who were murdered in the Gaza
Strip in an Islamic Jihad terrorist attack on May 2, Likud referendum
day. "Why, after 30 years of supporting and encouraging us settlers, did
you reverse yourself and call for disengagement from Gaza?" asked the
grieving family. In reply, Sharon could only stare at the floor and
mumble that the situation had changed. How and why it changed, he still
will not tell the public.

This inability or unwillingness on the prime minister's part to
communicate his thinking on the issue was a key factor in his referendum
defeat. The only explanation he did offer the public was that the
failure to find a Palestinian negotiating partner had left a dangerous
political vacuum which would be filled by pressures for far-reaching
Israeli concessions unless Israel preempted with a limited withdrawal.
But this explanation generated more questions than it answered. Had not
Sharon himself played a role in ensuring that there would be no
negotiating partner? Who would and could pressure Israel to give up more
territory--the Bush administration, Sharon's ally and supporter? Was it
not likely that an Israel-initiated unilateral limited withdrawal would
itself generate new pressures for further concessions? Was it not
possible for Sharon to negotiate the withdrawal with the Palestine
Liberation Organization, thereby getting something in return instead of
"giving a prize to the terrorists?"

The timing of Sharon's abrupt about face and embrace of disengagement
last autumn indicates that he felt politically isolated by the Geneva
accord and the wave of critical statements from serving and former
senior security officials. But he could hardly acknowledge that the
political left understood the situation better than him. So, just as he
had previously, under pressure, coopted the two-state solution idea and
the fence idea from the left, then proceeded to distort them for his own
needs, now he sought to disengage from a small portion of the
territories, not as a security measure intended to improve the
atmosphere for future negotiations, but as a political act designed to
end the process and leave Israel in effective control of a series of
bantustans. Even for Likud voters this was not an attractive package,
insofar as many of them want a political process and understand the
inevitability of at least some territorial concessions.

Meanwhile the international community, led by Washington and beginning
with US President Bush's dramatic endorsement on April 14, has signed on
to disengagement. The quartet in its statement on May 4 took "positive
note" of it, noting that it could help jump-start a roadmap
                                                -based bilateral peace
process.

This new international support for disengagement is an extraordinary
development. I was an early adherent of unilateral Israeli withdrawal
from the Gaza Strip and parts of the West Bank, including dismantling of
settlements and a green line fence, beginning around three years ago. I
and others tried on several occasions to persuade Bush administration
officials that the idea was worthy of their interest and support. We
cited four main arguments: the absence of a viable Palestinian
negotiating partner, tactical security needs involving suicide bombings,
the counter-productive nature of many aspects of the occupation and,
most centrally, the demographic threat that could only be met by a
deliberate process of separation.

At that time there were no takers in Washington for the idea, even
though the polls in Israel consistently showed majority support among
the public. As for Europe, which generally takes issue with Israel and
the US and argues that there is a Palestinian negotiating partner, the
idea of any unilateral Israeli measure has never been discussable until
now.

Thus the strange jumble of events of the last few weeks leaves us with a
reluctant Israeli leader who is apparently too embarrassed to
acknowledge publicly the real rationale for disengagement--the need to
maintain Israel as a Jewish and democratic state in the face of the
growing Palestinian demographic advantage--perhaps because it was his
settlement strategy that got us into this dilemma in the first place;
but also a leader whose mistaken decision to initiate a party referendum
has narrowed his political room for maneuver.

It leaves us with an administration in Washington that is in deep
trouble in Iraq, that has neglected the Israel-Palestine conflict for
years, and that now grasps at Sharon's initiative because it could
conceivably be translated into an election year achievement that somehow
appeals to the Arab world and to voters at home; but also an
administration that is falling over itself, first to support Sharon,
then to reassure the Arab world.

And, finally, events of recent weeks leave us with an international
community that belatedly recognizes that disengagement is the only game
in town, and that it is a more realistic option than ever--when in fact
Sharon may no longer be able to carry it out.

