The past two weeks have been the most violent since early 1996, and
marked what may be the final phase in the disintegration of the Oslo
process. The suicide bombings and other terror attacks in Israeli cities
came a few days after the new American peace initiative that that been
demanded by the Palestinians and their supporters in the region. The
wave of terror attacks coincided with the beginning of United States
envoy Anthony Zinni's mission to implement earlier ceasefire agreements,
and posed a direct challenge to the Sharon government and to the Bush
administration.

These attacks triggered a fundamental change in the balance of political
forces. Palestine Liberation Organization Chairman Yasir Arafat's
strategy since September 2000 has been to use violence to press Israeli
leaders into responding with "excessive force," in order to justify
international intervention and change the dynamics of the situation in
favor of the Palestinians. In contrast, Ariel Sharon has sought to avoid
this trap, while also leading a policy designed to prevent Arafat from
claiming any political gains through the use of violence and terror.

The carnage in Jerusalem and Haifa fully exposed the mythology of a
"popular uprising," and the leadership of the Palestinian Authority was
seen as responsible for allowing and encouraging terrorism. In response,
Israel launched the broadest military operation to date. The goal is to
force the Palestinian Authority (PA) to implement its commitments, or,
if necessary, to prepare the way for Israel Defense Forces' (IDF)
intervention to destroy the terrorist infrastructure. The Sharon
government's policies are supported by a wide Israeli consensus, and
have the explicit endorsement of the US, as well as broader
international acceptance.

It would be a mistake to view this confrontation simplistically as a
final shoot-out between Sharon and Arafat as individuals, like the
climax of a classic gunslinger movie. The IDF has not sought to kill
Arafat or force his exile--if this was the objective, it could be
readily achieved. Instead, Arafat's escape routes were closed in order
to prevent him from fleeing the scene, for a change. Arafat is being
forced to choose between directing the PA's security forces to dismantle
the terrorist infrastructure, or demonstrating once and for all that he
has no interest in, or capability to fulfill his end of the agreements.
The Oslo process created and granted legitimacy to the Palestinian
Authority, as a nascent state to be developed through interim agreements
and the permanent status negotiations. Israel accepted Arafat's return
from Tunis to lead this process, and the large security forces under his
command were equipped with thousands of automatic weapons. This force
was explicitly designed to provide stability in the territories under PA
control, and to prevent terrorist attacks against Israel.

Instead, from the Israeli perspective, this experiment is now widely
viewed as a disaster. The failure of the Camp David talks in July 2000
showed that Arafat's demands, particularly on the refugee issue, were
tantamount to demanding the end of the Jewish state, and had not changed
since 1947. The incitement and rejection of Israeli legitimacy--as seen
in textbooks, official media, and speeches before international
frameworks such as the United Nations--still fuel violence and terrorism.

At the same time, repeated pledges to dismantle the terrorist
infrastructure have lost credibility. On the contrary, Arafat and the PA
have allowed and encouraged periodic waves of bombings over the past
eight years, as well as other forms of violence. Working with Hamas,
Islamic Jihad, and other groups, the PA itself is viewed as a main
source of terrorism, and warnings of anarchy or the dangers of extremism
after the Arafat era are viewed as no worse than the intolerable status
quo.

Nevertheless, Sharon's decision to use ambiguous terms in defining the
PA as "an entity that supports terrorism" gives Arafat one final
opportunity, and also limits the strain within the Israeli coalition
government. The option still exists for an immediate and fully
transparent change in policy. This time, Israelis, Americans, and even
many European leaders expect far more than the empty words, revolving
doors, and house-arrests of top Hamas and Islamic Jihad leaders.

However, in the absence of a drastic change, Arafat's status will revert
completely to that of terrorist leader, stripped of political standing
and the benefits of international recognition. Similarly, until the
terrorist infrastructure is visibly dismantled, Israel will treat the
Palestinian Authority as a hostile and dangerous enemy. And if this
stage is reached, the chances for stability and management of this
conflict, and for the establishment of a Palestinian state, will be held
in abeyance for many years, or perhaps generations. This is Arafat's
final opportunity to fulfill his end of the Oslo agreements, and
belatedly begin the long and difficult process of transformation from
zero-sum conflict to stable coexistence and cooperation.

