Q: What is the Shinui Party's new peace plan?

A: We think that we should do something about the peace process,
and our initiative is to encourage Palestinian moderates, including Abu
Alaa, the new prime minister, by proposing a ceasefire and, after a
period of quiet, evacuating the settlement of Netzarim and leaving it as
a military base, then evacuating the military, and by releasing some
prisoners, removing the siege on many Palestinian cities, enabling some
Palestinians to enter Israel, and starting new joint economic ventures.

Q: Some reports indicate you want to change the location of
the security fence.

A: We know the Palestinians don't like the fence. The aim is to
prevent terrorists from getting into Israel. We're flexible on the
location, for example it should not go around Ariel, but be more or less
parallel with the green line. But we know that if we start to discuss
the location with the Likud, in the end we'll have no fence.

Q: Can Shinui lead this government to a new peace initiative?

A: Our agreement with the Likud is based on the roadmap
                        and Prime Minister Sharon's Herzlia speech
                   , according to which in the end there will be a
Palestinian state. But we know that within the government there are two
parties that oppose a Palestinian state, and we know that even some
Likud ministers are actually more to the right than we would like. We
are the moderate part of the government, trying to move toward concessions.

Q: How do you understand Sharon's strategy on the
Palestinian issue?

A: It's difficult to judge Sharon and to describe his real
feelings. We do know now that unfortunately we have no Palestinian
partner. During my period in the government we've seen that the
Palestinian Authority is not serious about security. Abu Mazen [Prime
Minister Mahmoud Abbas] had to resign, and the chances for progress are
slim. If we have a partner, I believe the Sharon government will move
with it. Sharon has stated he would, and there's a lot of pressure from
the US and the EU. I want to believe that in the end he would like to
have an arrangement with the Palestinians. In addition the economy is a
main factor. Hotels are empty and investors aren't coming because of the
political situation. So the government has an interest in peace.

Q: Do you see any likelihood of a coalition switch--Labor
replacing the two right wing parties?

A: It's hard to say. A big mistake was made by Labor under Mitzna
in refusing to join a national unity government. Now this does not seem
relevant, and unfortunately Labor does not have a leader. But if a peace
process starts and Israel is asked for concessions, then the National
Religious Party and National Union might leave and Labor could be asked
to join.

Q: You voted against yesterday's cabinet decision to carry
out a prisoner swap with Hizballah that includes hundreds of Palestinian
prisoners. How do you think such a swap will affect the Palestinian issue?

A: I think that if we look at the Arab world we see, on the one
hand, the extremists, Islamists, headed by Iran, including Hizballah and
Hamas and Islamic Jihad, down to the Israeli Islamic movements.
Releasing 400 prisoners to Hizballah is a sign that Israel understands
only force. It strengthens the extremists.

Q: Do you think the new Palestinian government under Abu
Alaa (Ahmed Qurei) can renew the peace dynamic?

A: Not really. We wanted to believe that Arafat had become "passe"
and would accept the role of honorary president and give power to a
prime minister. Now we hear that the security forces will still be
controlled by Arafat and he is not taking the necessary steps against
terrorists. I think some negotiations will begin with Abu Alaa if he's
ready, but negotiations by themselves are not the goal, we need results.
If the Palestinians are able to stop terror in some way, then the
process can go on. The Israeli government will not say no to a ceasefire
if it's voluntary.

