In recent weeks both Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and Palestinian
leader Yasir Arafat have made rare use of the media to deliver key
messages to totally different audiences. These gestures reflect the
considerable stress that both leaders are under.

But different kinds of stress.

One year after his dramatic election by a sweeping majority, Ariel
Sharon can no longer avoid addressing the failure of all his policies
and the resulting, inevitable, popularity decline. For a growing number
of Israelis, he cannot provide security, peace or bread on the table.
For an entire year he successfully compensated with adroit politics for
his inability to deliver on policy, and kept 70 percent of the people
behind him. He was assisted not a little by events beyond his control:
Yasir Arafat's mismanagement of the conflict and the events of September
11.

Now Sharon's image of cautious elder statesman is beginning to slip.
Fewer than 50 percent of Israelis are satisfied with his performance.
One recent poll revealed that less than a third of Israelis still
believe he has a plan to extricate the country from the current impasse.
Sharon's private polls almost certainly support this alarming finding.
So do the growing number of conscientious objectors among Israel Defense
Forces reserve officers, the long-striking disabled Israelis
demonstrating day and night outside his office, and the gradually
revitalized Israeli peace movement, which has now adopted unilateral
withdrawal as part of its program.

One of Sharon's smartest moves throughout the past year was to give few
interviews and to keep them short. The less loose talk the better. In
this way he created a positive contrast between his disciplined style of
governance and that of his two less experienced predecessors, Binyamin
Netanyahu and Ehud Barak, whose lack of confidence led them to talk to
the public incessantly and compulsively, frequently contradicting
themselves (Netanyahu actually used to phone in to radio talk shows to
make sure he got his daily message across).

Thus it was surprising to see Sharon giving repeated, lengthy interviews
to Israel's TV stations and major newspapers on the occasion of the
first anniversary of his election. He had virtually nothing new to say
(except to acknowledge that he regretted not having assassinated Arafat
back in Beirut in 1982!). His calls for unity fell flat.

In the midst of this media flurry Sharon's office also leaked news of
his meeting with senior Palestinian officials Abu Maazen, Abu Alaa and
Muhammad Rashid. This presumably also reflected polling results, which
show that nearly three quarters of Israelis wish to see him negotiating
with the Palestinians. In anticipation of his visit to the United States
in early February and in view of Washington's anticipated need for
Israeli-Palestinian "quiet" if and when it attacks Iraq, Sharon
apparently also sought to reassure the US that he was diligently
searching for peace partners. Even assassinations of Palestinian
terrorists appear to have stopped; the polls tell us that Israelis
believe they encourage terrorism rather than reducing it.

I doubt these media-based tactics will work. On the contrary, if I were
an opposition politician, I would smell blood. The Israeli public is
losing faith in Sharon. Fortunately for the latter, the alternatives
appear to be equally unattractive.

This is not the situation of Yasir Arafat in Ramallah. Siege and danger
have, if anything, increased his popularity with Palestinians. But his
credibility as a statesman, in Washington and Arab capitals, has hit
rock bottom. His media advisers have grasped that his television
interviews are disastrous. Hence the idea for someone--former US Consul
General in Jerusalem Ed Abington is the prime suspect--to ghostwrite an
op-ed by Arafat for The New York Times: a polished, articulate
exposition of a seemingly moderate Palestinian position, published on
February 3, a few days before Sharon met President Bush in Washington.

Too little, too late. Arafat's pledge to stop "the attacks carried out
by terrorist groups against Israeli civilians" rings hollow, especially
when, a few days later, Palestinian suicide bombers and rocket
production workshops were back in business as usual, and TV clips showed
Arafat haranguing his followers to produce another "one million
martyrs." Nor did Arafat's interviews with the Israeli weekend
newspapers alter his image: he seems as out of touch as ever with
Israeli realities.

Of course, Arafat's New York Times op-ed may also have reflected an
additional motive. By painting Arafat as a moderate, responsible
statesman and addressing "the personal attacks on me currently in
vogue," his advisers may be hoping to delegitimize alleged Israeli
efforts to depose him. A similarly polished op-ed by West Bank Fath
leader Marwan Barghouti published several weeks ago in The Washington
Post was quite blatant in accusing Israel of placing the writer on its
"hit list," and dared it publicly to attack him.

The op-ed as insurance policy.

