Perhaps because both sides are dependent on international support and
external factors, Palestinians and Israelis have always considered the
media and international public opinion crucial to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Israel has long depended heavily on all
kinds of support from outside, including economic, military, political
and diplomatic support. And since Israel is very familiar with Western
politics, it knows that maintaining an attractive view of Israel among
Europeans and Americans helps to maintain all kinds of international
support for Israel.

On the other hand, Palestinians--as the weaker party in this
struggle--feel that they must actively recruit international support.
Due to this imbalance of power, Palestinians have constructed their
entire recent political strategy upon giving up their basic political
rights and sticking to rights that are accepted by international law and
international legality, in particular Security Council Resolutions 242
and 338 that are acceptable to everyone, including the United States and
Israel.

It is true, however, that the Palestinian leadership is less sensitive
to the media's importance in stimulating international support. When it
does understand the significance of public relations, the leadership
simply does not know how to go about things or does not put matters in
the hands of people who know how to massage public opinion through the
press.

There are also structural features in the Palestinian leadership that
make Palestinians less "credible" or perhaps less attractive to
champions of their cause. Simply, their political system is not
democratic by Western standards. Often outside observers forget that one
of the reasons for this is the persistent Israeli occupation. The first
thing that Palestinians undertook after ending Israeli control over
Palestinian populated areas through the implementation of the Oslo
agreements was to conduct internationally-monitored elections.

A prominent example of the difference in the two sides' approach to
media relations was their handling of the Camp David 2000 talks. While
Israel grabbed the moment to give their version of why Camp David failed
(i.e., "it was the Palestinians' fault"), Palestinians just said
nothing--first, because they didn't know how crucial it was to speak out
at that moment, and second, because Palestinian President Yasser Arafat
instead commenced a tour in which he visited more than 25 countries and
their leaders in 20 days.

Public relations has also played a significant role during this
Intifada. The Palestinians, despite incurring most of the casualties and
suffering (particularly in the first few months of the Intifada), lost
the PR battle from the start. Ironically, Israel--despite its initiation
of the Palestinian-Israeli confrontations and despite its use of brute
force and despite the heavy casualties it inflicted on Palestinians (an
average of ten Palestinian dead a day)--incredibly managed to portray
itself as the victim in this struggle.

Over the last few weeks, however, we may have entered a new phase.
Yasser Arafat, who has been besieged in Ramallah and put under extreme
international pressure, has suddenly become extremely active in dealing
with the media and public relations. Interviews with the press and
press-covered meetings with the general public are now part of his daily
routine. He even published an article in the New York Times.

In these appearances, Arafat's tone has changed, on the one hand showing
increasing toughness in refusing to give in to Israeli threats and
pressure, and on the other hand using very moderate political language,
particularly in giving a new and significant concession in the official
Palestinian position on refugees.

Coincidentally or not, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon has also
increased his media appearances, departing from what seems to have been
good advice given him after taking office--in essence to "shut up." That
silence may have been one reason for his political survival to date.
Since he has changed his strategy and become generous to the media, his
public position has simultaneously deteriorated--both in Israel and
internationally.

These recent developments emphasize once again the extreme importance of
international public opinion to the two sides. It also demonstrates how
much leverage the outside world, especially the US and Europe, really
has over Palestinians and Israelis.

Europe and the United States and the international community in general
can be a major contributor to the cause of peace in the Middle East.
They have not yet done so only because the United States, following a
post-Camp David strategy of leaving the weaker party to the mercy of the
stronger in order to ensure progress by force, is avoiding involvement
itself and trying to prevent others from interfering. The recent media
blitz demonstrates that if the Americans stop holding the process
hostage, we might see results.

