Q: What is the current status of the wall?

A: Israel has now completed one-third of the wall, from Salim to
south of Qalqilya [in the northern West Bank]. This section is more than
110 kilometers long. A week ago, Israel approved another $100 million to
build the section of the wall that will attach the settlement of Ariel
to Israel.

The wall is now more visible than at any time before, and it is more
clear what the Israelis intended this wall to be. We were told that
there would be 26 gates in the wall [to allow Palestinians access to
their land on the other side]. Of the six gates that have been built,
two are totally closed. Other gates are partially closed [by barricades]
and trucks can't cross to bring the produce from the fields. Most of the
gates are only open for certain hours, and not the proper hours. For
example, one gate is open from 7 to 8 in the morning and from 4 to 5 in
the afternoon. But it is hot here, and farmers usually work from before
dawn until six, then return to their fields in the late afternoon and
come home late in the evening.

The other thing that we are seeing is that farmers crossing the gates
are being treated as if they are crossing into Israel, and are therefore
being asked to show a permit.

Lately, Israel has started to work on a road connecting Israeli land to
a settlement just behind the wall [in the West Bank]. They didn't tell
the Palestinian farmers [that owned this land] that the land would be
confiscated but are behaving as if that land is now part of Israel.
There was no notification, no confiscation order, nothing.They are doing
what they want with it. It has become quite clear that Israel intended
this to be a border, intended to confiscate this land, and intended to
prevent the farmers from coming to their land.

Q: What is your perception of the Bush administration's
comments about the wall?

A: We have had bad experiences with the US, even with what might
have been called a more liberal administration. I think that these
comments came out of the administration's frustration after it received
criticism over the war in Iraq. After [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel]
Sharon arrived in Washington, Bush reversed himself and said that there
was an understanding that the wall was for Israel's security.

Q: What do you see as the greatest challenge in the
campaign to fight the wall?

A: To mobilize the entire international community. We would like
to believe that an apartheid system can no longer exist in this century,
but now we are witnessing much worse. I think that we should work
together to prevent this, but it is happening so quickly.

In a very short time we will see the West Bank divided into three major
cantons and ten other enclaves and all the Palestinian people will be
surrounded and besieged. Because of past experience, we won't now
believe someone who only /talks/ about this issue, because it seems that
in this "peace" we are always paying the price. People have now learned
that "peace" is meant only to satisfy Israel's needs, while no one seems
to care about the occupation.

Q: Why should the average American or European care about
this wall?

A: If we look at the second intifada and how the world has
deteriorated, this region is one of the main reasons for this
deterioration. We can't deny that September 11 was related to what is
happening here. To solve the problem of the wall is to solve one of the
fundamental issues in the region.

I don't think it is very difficult; what is needed is for the
international community to force Israel to apply international law. We
don't want anything more than that. But what we are seeing now is that
the decision-makers, those who /created/ these laws, are just ignoring
them and establishing new rules to satisfy Israel.

Q: Are you satisfied with what the Palestinian Authority is
doing on the issue?

A: Unfortunately, the Authority's actions came late, but we saw
what happened when the Authority presented the issue, and how the
Americans reacted. One of our main demands is that there be no
negotiations without first stopping construction and dismantling this
wall. Otherwise we will be falling into the trap of the Oslo accords.

The first thing that Israel did after Oslo was to open the bypass roads
[connecting the settlements to Israel] and to double the number of
settlers. Now we are stuck because of this. If we go to negotiations
now, the same thing will happen. We will talk for one or two years, the
wall will be finished around us and we will be stuck again. But this
time, they are putting the final touches on the conflict.

I don't think that Palestinians will accept living in ghettos. This will
not be the reward for their struggle and sacrifice. We were struggling
for our freedom and for our identity and we won't accept to live as
slaves controlled by a bunch of racist settlers, so I think that
Palestinians will be much more aggressive, much more determined and much
more together.

