Since October 2000, Palestinian-Israeli relations have gone through a
deep crisis. This crisis may lead either to a total deterioration in the
whole area or paradoxically form a catalyst for peace. As other cases of
deep conflict in the world show, the "status quo option" is not viable.

There are many indications that we are approaching some sort of
resolution of the conflict, which might be temporary (once again
transitional arrangements before the next explosion) or a more
comprehensive resolution with the backing of Arab countries and the
world community. In any event, there is an overriding need to speak
about the dynamics of relationships between the external conflict and
internal conflicts within both Palestinian and Israeli societies. In
what follows, we will briefly delineate the repercussions of possible
settlement of the Israel-Arab-Palestinian conflict on Jewish-Arab
relations in Israel and the measures that should be taken in order to
create a reasonable atmosphere, which may serve as a stimulus for peace.

The status and conditions of the Palestinians in Israel have been deeply
affected by the Israel-Arab conflict, and mainly the conflict with the
Palestinian people. Despite the many difficulties and contradictions,
the Palestinians in Israel have developed over time an identity with two
main components: national (Palestinian-Arab component) and citizenship
(Israeli). This unique compound identity is the result of the
simultaneous existence of two reference groups--the Jewish majority in
Israel at the citizenship level and the Palestinian people and Arab
world at the national level. In both spheres, however, the Palestinians
in Israel are only partial members. As a result, their status is that of
a "double periphery" located on the margins of both Israeli society and
the Palestinian national movement.

No far-reaching change in the formal policy toward the Palestinian
citizens of Israel can take place unless this external conflict is
resolved. Accordingly, the peace process is expected to considerably
improve the status of the Palestinians in Israel.

Unlike the common misconception, we argue here that any peaceful
settlement for the Palestinian-Israeli conflict that does not take into
consideration internal social issues, including the expansion of the
borders of legitimacy of Israeli society (beyond the present
ethno-national character of Israel) would just deepen the status of the
Palestinians in Israel as a "double periphery," thus creating a great
potential explosion that might even endanger the whole process.

Judging by the Oslo agreements, the main motivation for peace on the
Israeli side was the need for separation between the Palestinians and
the Israelis, so as to preserve the Jewish-Zionist character of the
state and prevent its conversion into a binational state. This argument
has been voiced by Jewish leaders of both the Zionist right and left.
Hence the start of the implementation of the Oslo accords and later the
acceptance of these accords by Netanyahu's Likud government brought
about a significant decrease in the differences between the Zionist
right and left in Israel.

The Oslo accords increased the confusion and distress of the Zionist
left, since it has no clear social agenda. Social issues (associated
with class gaps, women, Arab citizens, etc.) have never been a main
interest of the Israeli left. Therefore, the Israeli left's lobbying on
behalf of peace has been divorced of any social-citizenship content.

One may conjecture that even though (as several polls show) there is a
majority among the Jewish public supporting a compromise for the
Israel-Palestinian conflict (based on separation), the Jewish majority
is becoming more closed on the civil level, which is associated with a
change in the nature of the state and the policy toward the Palestinians
in Israel. Therefore, the idea of transfer is gaining more support and
legitimacy over time among the Israeli Jewish public and policymakers
alike.

It follows that the crisis in Jewish-Arab relations in Israel today is
not the result of the October 2000 events, in which 13 Palestinian
citizens were killed by Israeli security forces. Rather, these events
are the issue of a gradual crisis that has accelerated since the start
of the "peace process," just as the al-Aqsa Intifada erupted against the
backdrop of gradual frustration and a deep crisis in the peace process.

Therefore, if a genuine change is to stand a chance, there must be a
radical shift in the Israeli strategy of conflict resolution. The
resolution of the external Israel-Palestinian-Arab conflict should be
accompanied by a social agenda that aims at nurturing a civil society in
Israel (and of course in Palestine). The assumption that social rifts
can be allowed to fester until the external conflict has been dealt with
has proved to be false. As experience elsewhere indicates, the
resolution of external conflicts tends to sharpen internal divisions
rather than reduce them.

Developing such a combined strategy for conflict resolution at the
external and internal levels is not easy to achieve, especially under
existing circumstances. One of the crucial conditions for the start of
such a process involves the construction of a wide coalition for peace
and equality through continuing dialogue, grassroots projects in the
fields of civil society and multicultural education, and a series of
activities to make policymakers and the public at large more aware of
the repercussions of the various future scenarios.

