The Arabs in Israel were an inseparable part of the Palestinian people
until 1948. After the wars that led to the establishment of the state of
Israel and the dispersal of the Palestinian people, this community was
separated from the other Palestinian communities in neighboring Arab
countries. Before delving into the history of Arabs in Israel, however,
it is useful to examine the results of the1948 War, which still form a
basis for the socio-political status of Arabs within Israel and indeed,
most of the greater Palestinian community.

After the 1949 ceasefire agreements signed between Israel and the
neighboring Arab states, there were approximately 150,000 Arabs still
living within the Green Line. This community comprised nearly one-sixth
of the Palestinians that had been living in the area that became the
state of Israel. The war had dispersed some 750,000 Palestinians, who
became refugees in neighboring Arab countries.

The Arabs who stayed in their homeland found themselves in an unenviable
situation. While the Arabs in Israel became citizens and enjoyed some of
the rights of citizenship, they were also completely cut off from the
rest of the Arab world--in particular, the Palestinian people. Inside
their homeland, they were treated with hostility, large tracts of their
land were expropriated and they lived under military rule until 1966.
This was the most difficult period for Arabs in Israel, who were
struggling just to survive under the oppressive policies enforced by
military authorities in Arab areas.

The 1948 War destroyed Palestinian society and its cultural and
political elite. When the leadership was dispersed and only vulnerable
segments of the Palestinian people remained, Israel was able to Judaize
the Arab areas and dispossess the Arabs within Israel of their
Palestinian identity. The Israeli authorities then imposed their
policies on the Arab areas, which were completely isolated from the rest
of the Arab world.

A very small minority of Arabs within Israel challenged Israeli policies
under that military rule. The most prominent among them were the
Communists and Pan-Arabists, who rejected Israeli policies towards the
Arab community. But in general, until 1967, the Arabs within Israel paid
dearly for holding fast to their homeland. They were isolated from the
Arab world and were subjected to Israeli policies of the military
administration specific only to the Arab community.

After the disastrous 1967 War, the Arabs within Israel emerged from
their isolation and renewed their contact with the Palestinian people
and the rest of the Arab world. The 1966 end of military rule and the
Israeli authorities' subsequent preoccupation with controlling the
Palestinian areas occupied in 1967 had an overwhelming effect on Arabs
within Israel. Starting in the mid-seventies, they gained
self-confidence and shaped a clear political agenda.

This agenda still stands today, although it has been refined over the
last three decades. It is based on two fundamental demands: peace and
equality. Peace is to be based on the establishment of a Palestinian
state in the West Bank and Gaza Strip under the leadership of the
Palestine Liberation Organization, and civil equality is to be created
between Arab and Jewish citizens of Israel as a condition for reaching
historical reconciliation and an end to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.

The overwhelming majority of Arabs within Israel supported the Oslo
Accords in 1993 because they broached the possibility of ending the
occupation and establishing a Palestinian state. At that time, the
government of Yitzhak Rabin sought to bridge the gaps between Arabs and
Jews by applying a policy of gradual parity.

These policies of the Rabin government enraged Israel's extreme
right-wing opposition. Rabin's assassination on November 4, 1995 was the
beginning of the end for the policies of equality and peace. Today,
years after Rabin's assassination, it is fair to say that the assassin
and his supporters in Israel's extreme right have succeeded in their
mission.

The future of Arabs within Israel and their attainment of equal civil
rights are inextricably tied to the future of the struggle between
Israel and the Palestinians. The continuation of the occupation and the
bloody conflict between the two peoples threatens even the few gains the
Arabs within Israel have achieved since the seventies. On the other
hand, ending the occupation and establishing a Palestinian state in the
West Bank and Gaza Strip only realizes one demand of the Arabs within
Israel. Their second demand is total equality. They demand an end to the
discrimination inherent in a state "solely for Jews," and demand that
Israel become a state for all of its citizens, both Arab and Jewish.

Today, as Israeli society stands on the threshold of new elections, its
citizens must choose between peace and equality, or occupation and the
continuation of conflict. If the successive government chooses the
latter, then the political right will have succeeded in blocking the
path to peace and equality based on dividing historic Palestine and
establishing two states. In that case, the Arabs in Israel, and
Palestinians in general, will be forced to create a new political
agenda. For example, this agenda might press for the establishment of a
democratic binational state on the entire land of Palestine from the
Jordan River to the sea, rather than an oppressive regime of racist
policies and apartheid.

Ending the occupation and establishing a Palestinian state in the areas
occupied since 1967 is a condition necessary to enable the Palestinian
minority within Israel to obtain total equality as citizens. Accepting
that solution would be a major concession, one made in order to reach a
historic reconciliation between the Jews and Arabs. If the political
right wing succeeds in thwarting this solution, it will not only
undermine chances of peace between the two peoples, but will also
threaten the stability of Israeli society and the Israeli political
system.

