Q: What is your demographic forecast for the year 2020?

A: First we have to clarify what we are discussing. The
population figures are confusing. We have "Palestine" from the
Mediterranean Sea to the Jordan River, we have official Israel, and we
have unofficial Israel including additional foreign workers and
Palestinian illegals who crossed the green line in the last 35 years in
large numbers. Moreover in Jerusalem the Arabs are citizens not of
Israel but of Jerusalem.

If we talk about the area from the river to the sea, at this moment Jews
are a minority vis-a-vis non-Jews, because we count about 300,000
foreign workers. Jews are about 48-49 percent, and will decrease to
about 39 percent in another 16 years.

If we withdraw to the green line or to a unilateral separation line, we
are now 77 percent Jews in Israel, and in another 16 years will be 71
percent--the rest being Arab citizens of Israel--or 64 percent if we
include non-citizens, i.e., foreign workers and Palestinian non-citizens.

Q: Israel has an active program of deporting illegal
foreign workers.

A: In no western country have they managed to solve the problem
of foreign workers; they'll live with us forever. It's the same all over
the globe.

Q: What is the scope of illegal Palestinian migration into
Israel since 1967? Will the fence reverse the trend?

A: Based on official statistics and my own surveys, I calculate
that more or less 300,000 Arabs have managed to "return" since 1948.
Prior to 1967, some 40,000 came illegally and legally; since then entry
has been by migration, lawful and unlawful, fictitious marriages, and
displaced West Bank Palestinians from 1967 who come as tourists and half
of whom stay here. Not all come because of "return". Between Mexico and
the US, the GNP gap is one to four, while between Israel and the West
Bank it's one to 17.

Q: So you're describing a north-south phenomenon? The
Israeli economy needs the workers?

A: Indeed, much of this has nothing to do with the conflict, but
rather with the economic gap. In our case it has been very easy to cross
the border. The fence will stop this so we can regulate this phenomenon
and separate it from "return". Note that 14,000 [West Bank] Palestinians
used to work in Umm al Fahm [an Arab town on the Israeli side of the
green line, now separated by the fence]; now only 3,000 remain.

Q: Looking at Israel's internal demographic problem, what
are the ramifications of Palestinian (Israeli Arab) population growth
inside Israel, especially in the Galilee and the northern Negev?

A: The mountainous Galilee area assigned to the Palestinian state
in the 1947 partition plan still has around 65 percent Arabs and 35
percent Jews despite all the incentives [for Jews to settle there].
Jewish youth are leaving Misgav and the Galilee for the Tel Aviv area.
From Biranit at the Lebanese border along the mountain spine through the
Galilee and the Afula area there is a link to Jenin and from there via
the West Bank to Jerusalem (an Arab city, depending how you define the
boundaries) down to Hebron and the Israeli Bedouin in the northern
Negev, with a potential to link up with Gaza, though there is still
Jewish territory in between. The problem with the Bedouin is a rate of
five percent annual natural increase, thereby doubling the population
every ten years--the highest rate in the world.

Q: How do you propose for Israel to counter this?

A: At the geographic level, I would create a new wedge of Jewish
settlement in the Jezreel Valley/Taanachim/Afula area, and again between
Gaza and the Israeli Bedouin in the Ashkelon/Sderot area, and along the
green line "seam line", the "stars" settlements west of the green line.

At the national level, we must begin by Judaizing all the non-Jewish
Russian immigrants, who now number 231,000. We can further reduce the
potential hostile internal population by co-opting the Druze and the
Christian Arabs. Turning to Jerusalem, why do we need east Jerusalem? We
should separate east Jerusalem from the rest and annex the holy basin
unilaterally. This would leave another 250,000 Arabs on the other side
of the fence. Then [only] 1.5 million Muslims would remain under Israeli
control in 2020.

Q: And between Israel and the West Bank and Gaza, what is
your demographic solution?

A: I'm ready to wait for a negotiated peace, but if I put myself
in [Palestinian leader Yasser] Arafat's head or that of any proud
Palestinian, they are asking: "what will the Jews leave us if they
withdraw to the green line? A prison called Gaza, one called Hebron, and
another called Nablus or Samaria. They [the Jews] won't accept the right
of return and will retain a mighty army. We Palestinians will have
corridors to Gaza within Jewish territory. This is unacceptable. We have
to just wait another ten years and we'll have a majority in all of
Palestine and an apartheid situation where the world will support us.
Israelis will leave. Time is in our favor."

Thus I don't think we have a partner for real negotiations, and we need
to take our own steps, to return to the green line, plus the settlement
blocs, minus Umm al-Fahm. The green line is not an international line,
it's a ceasefire line, and to avoid a Jewish civil war we need the
settlement blocs.

Q: Shouldn't both Israel and the Palestinians be reducing
their rates of population growth?

A: Yes. Just the effects of sewage and the ecological impact of
another three million people in Eretz Israel are a disaster that will
put us in the third world. We, both of us, are committing suicide, yet
the Palestinians are encouraging natural increase and so are we. For our
part we should not have restrictions on immigration, but we should
encourage the Singapore law, under which parents who have more than two
children have to pay all their educational and other expenses. It's
moral for President Mubarak of Egypt and Hashemi Rafsanjani of Iran to
talk birth control, but not us?

