The Palestinian people and leadership were quite confused and
disappointed by the negative American official response to the
International Court of Justice (ICJ) decision
                                           , simply because there are
only two ways for Palestinians to achieve their objectives. One way is
the approach that is promoted by the extremists: fighting by any
possible means to defeat the occupation and the Israelis--regardless of
any political, legal, or human consideration. The other path is based on
pursuing legal methods and using international law.

The Palestinian peace camp bases its demands and political program on
the relevant UN Security Council resolutions and international law.
Members of this camp have always tried to convince their fellow
Palestinians that law is the language that the civilized world,
especially the West, understands. We have argued that if we Palestinians
want to attract the support of the international community, especially
Europe and the United States, we have to pursue legal methods and
procedures and to base our objectives on the parameters of international
law and the relevant Security Council resolutions. Taking the issue of
the wall to the ICJ in The Hague is an illustration of the approach the
Palestinian peace camp promotes. Unfortunately, the dismissive and
negative reception in Washington to this opinion has a very destructive
effect on the ongoing debate between these two tendencies within the
Palestinian society.

In any case, the Palestinian people were encouraged by The Hague's
decision and are determined to try to benefit from it on all possible
levels. The way we read this legal finding goes beyond the issue of the
wall. The decision, which came from the highest legal body in the world,
has ended the debate over whether these territories--i.e., the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip--are disputed or
occupied. In addition, this resolution ended any possibility of Israel
claiming East Jerusalem as the capital of Israel. It consolidated the
Palestinian political and negotiating position that East Jerusalem and
the rest of the occupied Palestinian territories, including settlements,
are under illegal belligerent military occupation. The decision also
reinforced the applicability of the Fourth Geneva Convention to the
occupied territories.

The pathetic way in which Israeli officials reacted to this decision
tried to link the idea of building the wall with the insecure situation
inside Israel. They were helped in these arguments by the unfortunate
explosion in Tel Aviv. However, these protestations neglected the fact
that neither the Palestinians nor the ICJ has a problem with Israel
building a security wall on Israeli territory or the border, rather than
inside the occupied Palestinian territories.

