It appears as if the Bush administration has finally reached its moment
of decision on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. In the wake of the
American triumph in Iraq, the conflict in the Holy Land has been
repositioned as problem number one for Washington's foreign policy. But
will President George W. Bush rise to the challenge and prove his
determination and toughness on the Israeli-Palestinian quagmire, or will
he make do with the lower intensity "conflict management" that he has
adopted until now?

On the surface, all the ingredients are there for a courageous
diplomatic effort to stop the bloodshed and push Israelis and
Palestinians toward a renewed peace process. There are high expectations
for change from the two conflicted societies, fatigued after over 30
months of continuous violence. There are political debts to pay to
America's allies in the Arab world and London, who supported and
participated in the removal of Saddam Hussein and begged Washington to
deal with the Palestine issue. There are the prime ministers in
Jerusalem and Ramallah, who pledge their commitment to peacemaking. And
unlike in Iraq, where the United States encountered strong opposition
from many countries to its planned regime change, there are no real
opponents to the Bush vision of two states, Israel and Palestine, living
side by side in peace, security and prosperity. Regional extremists are
at their low point, and the rest of the world follows the American lead.

All these factors are well recognized in Washington and throughout the
Middle East. At this point, however, the Bush administration prefers not
to take the plunge, but rather to remain on the safe side of diplomatic
daring. Its policy formula could be termed "semblance of intervention"
or "safe-side engagement." It looks like the real thing, with
presidential speeches, an internationally accepted peace plan (the
roadmap                                                 ), and
high-level trips to the region. But so far, it has stopped short of
moving Israelis and Palestinians beyond empty gestures.

The model of post-Iraq American intervention is not new. It was invented
by the elder Bush administration in 1991, when the United States used
its coincidental victories in the Gulf War and the Cold War to drag
Arabs and Israelis to the Madrid Peace Conference, which launched a
first-ever direct peace process. Madrid and the ensuing negotiations,
from Oslo to Camp David, have not ended the conflict. Yet they brought
about a decade of relative calm and better stability in the region, and
managed to delimit the areas of dispute between Israel and its two
adversary neighbors, Syria and the Palestinians, so that the blueprint
for any future settlement is on the table.

The younger Bush administration refrains from grand gestures and prefers
to move the process in a "bottom-up" manner--starting from mutual small
steps, which are supposed to lead to larger steps, until both Israelis
and Palestinians restore their shattered confidence and are ready to
discuss the tough issues. This approach is presumably tailored to the
absorptive capacity of the rival leaderships, as it delays their tough
political struggles at home. However it carries a great risk of
disruption, since any progress is measured in inches at best. Thus the
public can hardly feel the movement, while adversaries of peace, or
stubborn leaders, are able to derail the process with relatively little
effort. At the same time, the responsibility for any failure lies with
the quarreling duo, while the Americans can walk away unharmed.

Upon his arrival in Jerusalem last Saturday, US Secretary of State Colin
Powell tried to avoid friction and conflict and emphasized agreement on
the need to start implementing the roadmap. He called upon the
Palestinians to uproot terrorism and the Israelis to ease the
Palestinians' humanitarian and economic hardships. The larger issues
discussed in the roadmap--which sets a three-stage, three-year plan to
establish a Palestinian state and solve outstanding disputes--were
shelved for the time being.

One can argue that Powell has no real choice, as he faces two difficult
interlocutors. Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is all but committed
to peacemaking and "painful concessions," but only in the far future;
right now, his gestures are timid, as he demands changes in the roadmap
and seeks to avoid political trials at home. His record puts his
sincerity in doubt: he has thus far successfully blocked any peace plan
during his term. His government has avoided any real move to restrain
settlement growth in the West Bank and Gaza, despite its repeated
half-hearted pledges to do so. Israelis feel they are winning the war,
and this is not a good recipe for compromise. And last but definitely
not least, Bush's perceived support for Israel helps him win crucial
Jewish votes and contributions as he readies himself for his reelection
campaign.

On the other side, Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen)
still lacks serious authority; he could not even host Powell in
Ramallah, the de facto Palestinian capital, for fear of the shadow of
his leader Yassir Arafat. It is doubtful whether Abu Mazen will be able
to rein in the terrorist groups in the West Bank and Gaza and fulfill
Sharon's tough demand for "100 percent effort" on security. Moreover,
craving legitimacy, Abu Mazen will have great difficulty compromising
with Israel.

Given these hurdles, no wonder Powell and his master in Washington are
reluctant to take big risks. But their cautious approach may deliver a
stillborn vision. Bush has proven his ability to take considerable
diplomatic and even military risks--on missile defense, transatlantic
relations and Iraq, to name a few--but he appears to lack this
determination on the Israeli-Palestinian issue. While solidifying
America's commitment to the two-state solution as none of his
predecessors ever did, Bush has refrained from expending serious
political capital to implement that vision. His prudence may strengthen
the forces on both sides that only want to prolong the status quo.

