The dismissal of two Israeli scientists, Professor Gideon Toury and Dr.
Miriam Shlesinger from the editorial board of the periodical The
Translator in accordance with a boycott against Israel declared by
several hundred academics, has generated a renewed wave of comparisons
between Israel's policies and the policy of apartheid. The attempt
several weeks ago to legislate a law in the Knesset permitting the
construction of communities for Jews only also reminded many observers
of the "whites only" signs in South Africa under apartheid.

The comparisons, or course, are not new. We still recall the United
Nations General Assembly Resolution of 1975, "Zionism = Racism =
Apartheid," which was cancelled by the same General Assembly 15 years
later. Even the map of areas A, B and C in the future Palestine provoked
waves of criticism because it reminded many in the world of the map of
Bantustans in racist South Africa.

The term "apartheid" has in recent years become synonymous with two
phenomena that at times do not even overlap. In the literal and perhaps
socio-geographic sense, apartheid means different categories of people
living separately by law. To some extent the American term "segregation"
captures this meaning of the term "apartheid." In its second, more
political sense, apartheid means the perversion of the law that derives
from the brutal rule of a minority over a majority. White rule over the
blacks of South Africa from 1950 to 1994 is the clearest example of both
phenomena in the modern era.

Even without the aid of the two dismissed experts on translation,
Professor Toury and Dr. Shlesinger, we can now undertake a serious
attempt to analyze both usages of the term "apartheid" relative to the
Israeli-Palestinian context.

Regarding the first meaning of the term--living separately--we must
acknowledge that in the region between the Jordan River and the
Mediterranean Sea there is almost no motivation on the part of the two
communities, Jewish and Arab, to live together in terms of society,
culture and religion. For the most part they live separately of their
own volition and not because of legal compulsion, reflecting the two
communities' closed and conservative nature and their desire to preserve
their cultural and religious individuality. There is almost no joint
education for Jewish and Arab children and there are virtually no mixed
marriages. True, both establishments present administrative barriers to
socio-cultural integration, but it is important to note that the
establishments of both sides are involved here, and that there is a high
degree of cooperation between the two communities and their respective
establishments. The attempt by the Muslim Qaadan family to purchase a
home in the exclusively Jewish community of Qatzir (which gained
worldwide publicity and produced the abortive attempt to legislate
regarding Jewish communities) is not a common phenomenon in Israel.

Turning to the second meaning of the term apartheid, its political
context, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is near boiling point. There
are today some five million Jews and over one million Arabs inside the
1967 borders of Israel. In the Gaza Strip, West Bank and East Jerusalem,
which are intended for the future Palestinian state, there are some 3.5
million Palestinian Arabs and half a million Jews. In other words, in
the disputed territory between the Jordan and the Mediterranean there
are around 5.5 million Jews and 4.5 million Arabs. For the time being
this constitutes a clear Jewish majority inside Israel and a bare
majority throughout the entire territory.

Factoring in population growth trends, coupled with the near total
decline in immigration to Israel, we can project a situation of parity
between the two populations around 2010, and an Arab majority from the
second decade of the 21st century. In other words continuation of the
status quo, in which Israel exercises security--and in practice economic
and political--control over the entire territory, will place Israel in a
political apartheid situation in the Israel-Arab conflict in the
foreseeable future.

Since the clock is ticking, and bearing in mind that the current
Palestinian leadership has lost the confidence of the US administration
and the Israeli public as a consequence of the Intifada, the inclination
among Israelis toward separation from the Palestinians is in fact a
struggle against the gathering danger of political apartheid. At
present, political and physical separation (including the removal of
settlements beyond a fence) is the only way to avoid rule by a Jewish
minority over an Arab majority in just a few years. Accordingly, the
construction of that fence between Israelis and Palestinians should be
seen throughout the world as separation to prevent apartheid.

Linguistically this sounds absurd. But it is decidedly not absurd to
anyone who understands the reality of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict
in 2002, and who wants the State of Israel to remain both Jewish and
democratic.

