Democracy is highly relevant to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. It
does not necessarily constitute a solution to the conflict, as United
States President George W. Bush would perhaps have us believe; nor is it
necessarily a victim of the conflict. But it is clearly an important
factor in the history of the conflict over the past 10 years. And it is
relevant to a solution.

The first link between democracy and the conflict goes back to the Oslo
accords. The Rabin government, in entering into the Oslo agreements,
initially encouraged the Palestinians to establish a democratic regime,
with elected leaders and a legislative body. But it also assumed that
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat was a willing partner in a "deal"
whereby Israel would deliver territories to him in return for his
willingness to suppress Islamic extremist terrorism. Thus, alongside his
initial encouragement for Palestinian democracy, Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin presumed that an authoritarian Palestinian regime under Arafat
would, like other neighboring Arab regimes, be more efficient at
suppressing terrorism than democratic Israel had been. Hence his famous
remark that Arafat would not be troubled by the Israeli high court and
Israeli human rights advocates in dealing with terrorists.

Here we have not one but two mistaken assumptions: First, that the PLO
under Arafat--democratic or not--would "deliver" on terrorism; secondly,
that it was acceptable for Arafat to bend the rules radically in a good
cause, in the process creating a corrupt, violent and oppressive regime.
These, in turn, raise new questions for the near future: Would a genuine
Palestinian democracy--if it could be established--indeed deliver on
terrorism where the autocratic Arafat has disappointed? Will some
alternative Palestinian dictator deliver on terrorism if he can just be
engineered into power?

These questions are highly relevant in view of the apparent Israeli,
American and international assumption that by pressuring the
Palestinians to replace Arafat and clean up their regime we can somehow
restore momentum to the peace process. Isn't it equally possible that
true democracy in Palestine will follow the Algerian model, bringing to
the fore anti-democratic Islamist elements whose sole purpose is to
abuse the system? Won't President Bush ultimately be satisfied with a
Mubarak type Palestinian autocrat, as long as he suppresses terrorism?
Won't Israel?

On the other side of the conflict is Israeli democracy--lively, but
poorly structured, indeed nearly anarchic. For some ten years now it has
been plain to most Israelis that a successful formula for coexistence
with the Palestinians requires the emergence of a Palestinian state,
which in turn requires the removal of Israeli settlements. Yet
successive prime ministers from Rabin to Ariel Sharon, some presiding
over "peace coalitions," have continued building the settlements rather
than dismantling them, thereby leading Israel on its own march of folly
toward violent confrontation and, ultimately, South Africanization.

Here we witness the destructive influence of a radical, dynamic minority
of settlers who have successfully exploited the democratic system to the
detriment of nearly everyone. Was it Abba Eban who said that democracies
make the right decisions only after they have exhausted all the other
possibilities? Some of us can be forgiven for feeling exhausted
wondering just how long it will take us to work through those "other
possibilities."

Meanwhile Israeli democracy is being sorely tried by the struggle
against terrorism. In our desperate search for successful deterrents
against Palestinian suicide bombers we have been obliged to violate
Palestinian human rights through measures like closure and curfew and
now house demolitions and deportation--all in an effort to protect
Israelis' right to live. We are being dragged deeper and deeper into a
dirty war.

It is small comfort to note that the United States, too, has been
obliged to curtail the human rights of its own citizens as well as its
prisoners from the Afghan conflict. Unfortunately for us, the intimate
coexistence of the Israeli and Palestinian peoples--geographically and
demographically--makes for far greater human suffering in this part of
the world than in America. It also calls for very different solutions.

Given the complexities of the conflict, the most democratic, hence just,
step Israel can take today is to disentangle itself from Palestinian
life: withdraw, dismantle outlying settlements in Gaza and the West
Bank, build a fence to protect ourselves, and make sure Palestinians
understand that we continue to carry a very big stick.

Whether or not Palestinians reform their regime structure and become the
region's first true democracy is up to them, not us. It is pointless for
us to oppress them because we are disgusted with their leader. Whether
or not they have a leadership that abjures violence and seeks peaceful
coexistence with a Jewish and democratic Israel is ultimately up to
them, not us--though here we have a right, and an obligation, to respond
with great force if they inflict violence upon us.

The only democracy we can and must legitimately worry about is our
own.

