Q: What do you make of the recent flurry of Israeli reports
and predictions concerning Palestinian and Israeli population growth?

A: I think this is purely a reflection of their nightmare
concerning their own concept of the Jewishness of the state. They don't
want to recognize that the only way to preserve the Jewishness of the
state, if one looks at the way Israel was created, is to conduct a
comprehensive, persistent and regular [forced] exodus of the Palestinian
people because historic Palestine has one indigenous population and one
implanted population. Otherwise, the best way for Israelis to wake up
from this nightmare is by creating a Palestinian state next door.

Q: Which of these recent Israeli demographic assessments is
most accurate, in your opinion?

A: Historic Palestine has two populations, Israeli and
Palestinian. As of today, the Palestinian population is not the
majority. But in two years time--only two years time--we will be
reporting that the two populations are equal, regardless of what the
Israelis do. In the year 2006, 50 percent of historic Palestine will be
composed of Palestinians, and 50 percent will be composed of Israelis.
Every year that follows, the majority will be for the Palestinians. I
know that [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon has been making his own
plans to bring in one million Jews by the year 2010. Even if this
happens (which I doubt), the Palestinians will continue to grow as a
majority in historic Palestine.

As for the Palestinians that are now Israeli citizens, their percentage
is somewhat stable, but slowly growing. Now they are around 20 percent
of the Israeli population. Gradually this will increase because the
Palestinian population reproduces much faster.

Q: This poses a lot of political questions for the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, but is it also a policy problem for
Palestinians?

A: Indeed. With every additional Palestinian, we will have to
produce a lot of resources that we may not have. It is a fact of life
that Palestinians are more fertile than Israelis, they grow [as a
population] much faster than Israelis and with this, there are pros and
cons. In my opinion, we will have to face a special music of our own in
feeding all these babies and this is a very serious challenge facing
Palestinians from a socio-economic perspective.

But the question here is not one of Palestinians trying to overcome
Israel through demography, it is a question of Israel trying to preserve
a specific nature using means that will have terrible consequences.
Therefore, the problem should not be looked at from the Palestinian
perspective.

The question is, what will Israelis do? What kind of a state do they
want to have? If they want to have a Jewish state, they have only two
options. One is to accelerate their own efforts to help create a
Palestinian state within the borders of 1967, which means that Israel
will retain a majority of Jewish blood and have to live with the fact of
a Palestinian minority. But under the current Israeli political and
settlement plan, they are only making it impossible for Israel to be a
Jewish state.

Q: Do you think that the Palestinian birthrate has
increased with the intifada and do you have data to support that?

A: We have historically observed that whenever there is an
increased threat facing the Palestinian population, they tend to
increase their fertility rate. We witnessed this immediately after the
Lebanon war, after the first intifada and we do have a slow increase in
the fertility rates nowadays. Of course, this reflects socioeconomic
conditions--a high number of unemployed Palestinians, women not finding
opportunities in the marketplace--these are the typical parameters for
increasing fertility rate in any population. We also have limited
outward migration, especially during the last few years (before that we
had serious inward migration) and a low infant mortality rate, which
also affects the size of the population.

Q: One of the complaints of some Palestinian citizens of
Israel about the Geneva accord
                                               was that it granted
legitimacy to the concept of Israel as a "Jewish state", which in turn
damages their own quest for rights as equal citizens.

A: I think that this concept is a racist concept. Israel
should raise the slogan that it is a state for all its citizens--Jews,
Christians, Muslims, etc. If they must have a "Jewish state", then they
will have to deal with the immense problem of a growing minority that is
basically stripped of its rights. In my opinion, I would rather see next
door a state that grants equal rights to its citizens and allows all its
citizens to prosper.

Q: How was Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei's recent statement
concerning a one-state solution related to demographic issues?

A: This was a statement of what the facts may lead to: if the
default on the peace process continues, the Palestinians will eventually
find themselves struggling to survive within the boundaries of a state
that is keeping them in large segregated areas. With the diminishing of
the chances for establishing a viable independent sovereign state,
Palestinians will have no choice but to claim their rights.

