When it is clearly time to work on laying the foundations of democracy
in Palestinian society (for this society has a clear stake in laying
these foundations--so do its neighbors and the world), the bargaining of
interests and powers is dictating a "compromise." Competing powers,
fighting over the Palestinian "style of self determination," always
manage to reach a compromise that steps on the toes of democratization,
since democracy cannot compromise with the enforcement of something
against the will of a nation. This, unfortunately, happens to be the
history of Arab-Israeli struggle, of occupation, and of the "war-like
peace process" that Oslo turned out to be.

One of the problems of democracy is that it has not stopped being
nationalist by nature, and tends to be localized rather than global. In
practice, democracy controls relations within a state/society, but not
between nations. If national interest and democratic processes and
values come into contradiction, national interest dominates because of
democracy's localized nature. Hence, there can be nothing democratic in
a conflict, other than the democratically-made choice to be non-democratic.

The answer to the rhetorical question of whether it is easier for two
dictators to reach peace than it is for two leaders democratically
representing two nations is, unfortunately, not only rhetorical. On the
other hand, the harder choice (to make peace by democratic will) is the
more lasting one. But this choice presupposes the existence of two
democracies in a conflict, which cannot be the case when one nation is
subordinated to the other by occupation. This may explain why
decolonization is typically not a democratic process.

This was the case with each decolonized Arab Nation, throughout Africa,
and in Latin America. It seems that the effort put into the struggle
against occupation, the colonizers' destructive force, and the means
required to face colonial power and violence leaves societies with
political traditions, an economy, education, and set of values that make
it very hard to democratize.

We should also bear into account that democracy is not an automatic
choice. We should be able to imagine nations that would willingly choose
a non-democratic system for their lives. There are certain conditions
when democracy is "the right choice" for a nation. These conditions boil
down to the fact that people should have a stake in democracy, or else
some other system might happen to be more suitable for their lives.

The main interest at stake that democracy protects and sustains is power
to-be-shared and wealth to-be-distributed according to a certain social
contract. Hence, powerlessness, poverty and lack of sovereignty cannot
produce democracy. The lack of democracy, as a result, is not likely to
produce a sustainable peace. This logic leads to a well-known
conclusion: colonialism is a vicious circle for both the colonizer and
the colony. Both sides will pay a price for each day that passes without
breaking this vicious circle, although that price may be more affordable
than bloodshed, which will only grow and accumulate and be more
difficult to settle.

The mechanism of build-up for this vicious circle is blindness. The
seeking of revenge (hatred due to an emotional reaction to violence)
creates a situation where people tend not to see the long-term effect of
the damage on themselves, and the attention is deflected from the
original goals: parties tend to put more effort into harming the other
than into reaching their initial goals. If the political leadership
works only on the pulse of the street, it, too, becomes blind. (Note
that if it does not, it risks losing popularity.) This seems to explain
why damaging the future is the "modus operandi" of Middle Eastern
politics. It is a result of the shortsightedness or cowardly nature of
its political leaders.

What we need are leaders who are truthful enough and dedicated enough to
have a political vision of peace and justice, who are willing to lead
and then to give up their political careers for a while after signing a
genuine peace treaty that is designed to last. Only such a leadership
can lead the two nations of Israel and Palestine into genuine
democracies of the future, where the limits of the democratic system
extend further than those of the army.

