The issue of democracy has always been a source of debate in liberation
movements, with the Palestinian liberation movement posing no exception.
Palestinians nearly settled that debate when they had the chance to
cultivate a political authority for the first time based on the 1994
Oslo agreements. On that occasion, Palestinians proved (first to
themselves, then to the outside world) faithful to their democratic
intentions, taking the first available opportunity to elect a
legislative body. Unfortunately, this council was limited in its powers
and responsibilities by the Oslo agreements with Israel. Most of those
limitations were Israeli restrictions, some set in the language of the
agreement, and others simply Israeli practices implemented through the
course of that agreement.

The debate over democracy, power, and its place in the conflict was
recently renewed among Palestinians and others when United States
President George W. Bush made his famous speech launching a vicious
attack on the Palestinian leadership and calling for elections, while at
the same time telling Palestinians in no uncertain terms not to reelect
their current leadership.

That statement inspired discussion within the Palestinian leadership
over the importance of democratic elections and the need to support the
right of the Palestinian people to choose their leadership. It also
shored up the Palestinian public's insistence on supporting the current
leadership because it is an elected leadership.

It is easy to make the argument that the greatest limitations on
Palestinian democracy are those imposed by the Israeli occupation. For
example, Israel in 30 years of military occupation only twice allowed
Palestinian municipal elections. Today, the reason that the Palestinian
Legislative Council has not held a second election in six years is that
Israel has not allowed that to happen. This raises very legitimate
questions about Israeli democracy, which is democratic to a certain
extent inside Israel, but prevents democracy and democratic problem
solving by Palestinians. In addition, the nature of Israeli practices in
the occupied territories contributes to creating an apartheid situation
where two communities--one, an indigenous Palestinian society, and the
other, an illegal Israeli settler community--are living in the same area
but under two completely different and unequal sets of laws.

There is, on the other hand, a strong linkage between democracy and
peace for the simple reason that democracy allows the public to have its
say over the policies and practices of its government. Human beings
usually express a genuine desire for peace. And for that reason, the
more democratic a society is, the more peace is pursued in that
society's political expressions.

Allowing for real democracy and democratization to emerge in Israel and
Palestine can only increase the chances for peace. In order to enable
Palestinians to develop their society towards democratic practices and
norms, what is required is to end external control over Palestinian
society, i.e. to end the occupation. That is the main obstacle towards
real democracy.

