Even before the Palestinian-Israeli conflict took on its full
dimensions, the rhetoric of demography was used to sell the idea of
establishing a Jewish state in Palestine. Jewish leaders suggested in
the early twentieth century that this region would be a suitable "land
without people for a people without a land." The activation and
acceleration of Jewish immigration in the first half of that century
was, among other things, a tool to manipulate local demography. Too, the
activities of armed Jewish organizations, some of them deemed terrorist
groups by the British mandate authorities, were certainly aimed at
pushing the indigenous inhabitants of Palestine out of the land into a
stateless diaspora, thus helping Jews to win the population race.

More recently, the demographic component of the conflict has taken on
increased urgency, for Israel in particular. In spite of all efforts to
manufacture an Israeli citizenry that is as "purely" Jewish as possible,
there remain some one million Palestinians in Israel's borders. Also,
because the occupation of the rest of historic Palestine, i.e. the West
Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip, persists and has
been consolidated by the construction of settlements within these
occupied areas, the green line has nearly disappeared. Israel now finds
itself in a situation where experts are warning of a demographic
majority of Palestinians "from the river to the sea." That has many
Israelis worried, and creates a dilemma for Israel's right-wing
leadership which on one hand wants a Jewish state for ideological
reasons, but on the other hand wants to maintain Israeli control over as
much as possible of the Palestinian occupied territories for historic
and religious reasons. That dilemma has been picked up on, not only by
Palestinians, but also by the United States administration, which has
begun to warn Israel against consolidating and maintaining the occupation.

Israel would do itself a favor if it would stop trying to have its cake
and eat it too. The pursuit of two contradictory policies is harming the
Palestinians, who are being deprived of their natural right to
independence and statehood. It is also, however, proving detrimental to
Israel.

"Population imbalance" is only a problem in the context of crises and
war. That is why the only way out for both Palestinians and Israelis is
to adhere to international legality which means an end to the occupation
of the Gaza Strip and West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the
removal of the illegal Jewish settlements there in order to open the way
for the establishment of a separate and independent Palestinian state
side by side with Israel.

