Shortly after Yasser Arafat died, I described the situation in Palestine
as "revolutionary", in the sense that so many potential new power
dynamics could now emerge or be launched that it was impossible to
predict what would happen: anarchy, violence, or a peaceful transition
to a better government. So far the situation has been admirably
"evolutionary". Responsible Palestinian leaders have been moving toward
elections and striving earnestly for a ceasefire, while Egypt has
spearheaded an inter-Arab and international effort to facilitate both.
Meanwhile, in Israel the Sharon government has reacted responsibly.

Of course, there are numerous pitfalls and problems here and not a few
paradoxes. One paradox, for example, is the specter of Egypt's President
Mubarak, who like most Arab presidents is periodically reelected
unopposed, championing Palestinian presidential elections in which there
are nine candidates. Three issues appear to be particularly relevant to
both the democratic nature and the potentially beneficial effects of
these elections.

First, the now defunct Marwan Barghouti candidacy. On the one hand,
recent polls predicted a close race between Barghouti and Mahmoud Abbas
(Abu Mazen), thereby guaranteeing that these elections would be real and
democratic in ways never before seen in the Arab world. On the other,
had Barghouti persisted in his candidacy and been elected, this could
have plunged Palestine and Palestinian-Israeli relations back into
chaos. After all, Barghouti does not embrace Abu Mazen's rejection of
violent resistance. Nor is there much likelihood of Barghouti's release
from Israeli jail (unless US President Bush unexpectedly offers to free
Jonathan Pollard in return, an offer that Sharon would find it hard to
refuse). As one senior Palestinian Authority figure--like Barghouti an
"insider" from the younger generation of Fateh--put it to me, "I don't
want to replace a leader under siege [Arafat] with a leader in jail".

It is also debatable whether the presence of two presidential candidates
from the Fateh movement was a healthy or a harmful phenomenon for the
Palestinian national movement at this stage in its evolution; my
inclination was to see this development in a positive light, in the
sense that Barghouti, had he stayed in the race, would have broken the
monopoly of the Fateh old guard. Finally we might have had an election
for an Arab head of state whose outcome was not a foregone conclusion!

A second serious problem is the Hamas boycott. A boycott sends the
message that the Islamic movement is not, or not yet, ready to abandon
its quest for a solution by force and to compromise and enter the
Palestinian political system. While a Hamas boycott on January 9 may not
be as delegitimizing as a Sunni boycott is likely to be in Iraq on
January 30--after all, the Palestinians held an election successfully in
1996 without Hamas' participation--it nevertheless poses the danger of
Palestinian disunity in the post-election phase.

Worse, if Hamas and/or other elements like the Aqsa Martyrs Brigades
refuse to enter into a genuine and stable ceasefire--indeed, even to
exercise a measure of restraint if Sharon authorizes a targeted killing
against a "ticking bomb"--we encounter the third and probably the most
disruptive problem of all: ongoing Palestinian violence, and Israeli
military response, accompanying the election process. The first major
challenge in this regard was generated by the tunnel attack on an IDF
outpost on the Gaza-Sinai border on December 12.

Despite these potential and actual drawbacks, and bearing in mind the
"revolutionary" alternatives, thus far this has been an impressive
process. It turns out that in Arafat's time some serious democratic
constitutional foundations were laid. Abu Mazen, freed of Arafat's
oppressive shadow, is making admirable efforts to stabilize an extremely
delicate situation. Palestinian polling results show impressive
majorities opposing military operations and Hamas.

So far, so good. Nevertheless, we must remind ourselves that beyond
successful Palestinian elections, followed hopefully by a coordinated
Israeli withdrawal from Gaza and the northern West Bank, there appears
to be little basis for extensive agreement between Sharon and Abu Mazen
regarding the borders of a roadmap phase 2 state with provisional
boundaries or the heavy final status issues of territory, Jerusalem and
refugees. Besides, Abu Mazen will not wield anything approaching the
authority that Arafat held.

Nor is it clear to what extent US President Bush is prepared to commit
American prestige and resources to anything beyond successful
Palestinian elections.

