UN General Assembly Resolution 181
                                            is one of the most
significant milestones in the history of the Palestinian-Israeli
struggle and one of three baselines used by different Israeli or
Palestinian politicians in evaluating what are the rights of this side
or that in the conflict.

One baseline used by some on both sides is historical reality and rights
arising from this. Some use the relatively recent Jewish immigration to
Palestine to conclude that Palestinians have the right to historical
Palestine. Others, both Jews and Palestinians, will dig deeper into
history and go back thousands of years to find justification for their
rights to the land.

These conflicting claims ultimately led to the involvement of the United
Nations. The first UN resolution that dealt with disputed rights in
Palestine was the 1947 partition plan, UNGAR 181, which was posited as a
compromise between two peoples disputing the whole land of Palestine.
That compromise was based on dividing Palestine and legitimizing the
establishment of two states, Israel and Palestine in historical Palestine.

The reality of the day, the prevailing balance of power and subsequent
wars, eventually led to a situation whereby another landmark was
established with UNSCR 242, which calls for an end to the Israeli
occupation in the areas of historical Palestine occupied by Israel in
1967, i.e. the West Bank including east Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip.

That resolution drew another baseline for what is legitimate and what is
not legitimate and created a new basis for compromise, the borders of 1967.

It is difficult to think of other bases for compromise. Some Israelis,
including the current government, downplay the significance of the
borders of 1967, and try instead to move the borders further east. But
when Israelis try to move the basis for compromise east, Palestinians
will do the opposite, and try to move the basis for compromise west, by,
for example, invoking UNGAR 181.

An important conclusion here is that the less legal and political weight
we give to the 1967 borders as a basis for compromise, the more weight
is given to 181, at least among Palestinians and Arabs. That's why the
international community, represented by the Quartet countries and
vocalized in the roadmap, stipulated that the final resolution would
require Israel to "end the occupation that began in 1967".

Borders and points of compromise are not the only significant aspects of
UNGAR 181. The other and maybe more significant factor is the
establishment of a legal foundation for the principle of two states. In
the Palestinian and Arab perception, and probably from a legal
perspective as well, the two state concept is not a half measure. Having
an independent Palestinian state is the other face of the coin of having
an independent and legitimate Israeli state. In other words, the
establishment of a Palestinian state is necessary for the legitimacy of
the Israeli state. That is the essence of UNGAR 181, which was the
source of legitimacy for the creation of the state of Israel.

One should look at international legality vis-a-vis the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict in its entirety and not in a selective way.
UNGAR 181 legitimizes the principle of two states, Israel and Palestine,
while UNSCR 242 in addition to the most recent UNSCR 1397 which adopts
the roadmap, determine the specific, realistic and legal borders between
those two states.

