When important people die it is customary to remark that a chapter has
been closed in the life of the collective they led and within which they
acted. In many cases this is an empty phrase; in Yasser Arafat's case it
is precise. For better or for worse, the fate of the Palestinian people
was embodied in him. Because so many things were dependent on him, his
death creates a new reality.

Arafat leaves behind a Palestinian people embroiled in an armed
intifada, with a weak Palestinian Authority, chaos in the West Bank and
Gaza, Hamas gaining strength and Fatah wracked with dissent. But he also
leaves Palestinians with international standing, general recognition of
the necessity of solving their problem, a bureaucratic establishment
built in the territories in recent years in anticipation of statehood,
and a readiness--even on the Israeli right--to acquiesce to the
establishment of a Palestinian state.

Arafat agreed, albeit with many reservations, to the Clinton Plan of
January 2001 and without reservations to the Quartet's roadmap. He
bequeaths those understandings to the leadership that will replace him,
which accordingly will not have to confront the need to break any
political taboos. Recognition of Israel, agreement on a Palestinian
state within borders based on the 1967 lines, a readiness to recognize
Israeli sovereignty over Jewish neighborhoods in East Jerusalem, the
Jewish quarter of the Old City and the Western Wall--all these can now
be converted into assets by a Palestinian leadership that seeks peace.

Arafat--the statesman and the terrorist, the man who came to the UN
General Assembly with a gun and an olive branch, who spoke of martyrs
and of jihad but also of the peace of the brave--provided the ultimate
legitimacy to the Palestinians, even to those who did not support him
and to Islamic extremists who resolutely opposed him. He did not use his
authority to make peace, but his followers can exploit the political
concessions he made when they feel strong enough to lead a dramatic new
departure.

Israel will be making a terrible mistake if it stands idly by and waits
to see how Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas), Abu Ala (Ahmed Qurei) and their
associates deal with the new reality. If it has any interest in
strengthening the pragmatic Palestinian camp it must start talking as
early as possible with the Palestinian Authority about the planned
withdrawal from Gaza; it must return to the negotiating table and begin
to implement the roadmap. Ceasing targeted killings, reducing
roadblocks, easing the life of Palestinians, releasing prisoners--all
these acts will strengthen the new leadership without compromising their
status. Sharon is well aware of this; if he didn't understand it on his
own, he was enlightened by the IDF chief of staff, who didn't hide his
view on the way we failed to capitalize on Abu Mazen's tenure as prime
minister.

The Bush administration, which has high regard for Abu Mazen and an
interest in his success, must now update the roadmap and reinvigorate
it. It makes no sense for everyone to swear by the roadmap, which speaks
of a final status agreement in 2005, but for President Bush to
officially announce that that date is not realistic. An agreed Israeli
withdrawal from Gaza must be integrated immediately into the roadmap,
and a new and realistic timetable established, in order for the two
sides to return to the negotiating table and complete the task that was
interrupted at Taba in January 2001. The goal is an agreement modeled
after the Clinton Plan, the Bush vision and the Geneva accord.

