There appear to be no fewer than six different categories of advocates
of regime reform in the Palestinian Authority. The diverse advocates are
less interesting for what they propose--their commendable ideas range
from "kicking Arafat upstairs" to a ceremonial position, via new
democracy and transparency provisions, to uniting all Palestinian
security forces under a single command--than for why they have gotten
into the business of reforming Arafat's regime in the first place.

First are those Israeli right wingers who seek to install a more
moderate and friendly Palestinian regime largely because they believe
that it will then accept reduced Israeli territorial offers and ongoing
Israeli security dominance. Ostensibly Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
belongs to this group; after all, he already tried in the past to
install and manipulate pro-Israel proxies in the West Bank and Gaza (the
Village Leagues, 1981) and in Lebanon (1982). These attempts failed
miserably, and Israel paid a heavy price, particularly in Lebanon.

Precisely for this reason it appears that Sharon himself may understand
that his advocacy of Palestinian regime reform is a nonstarter. In fact,
he probably views the demands as a convenient excuse for avoiding
entering a peace process in which he will be called upon to offer
serious territorial concessions. This second category of advocates of
change, then, are counting on Arafat to scuttle the reforms.

A third category of Israeli advocates are ideological conservatives who
believe that democratic regime reform imposed from without on the
Palestinians will truly benefit Palestinian society, and that it
constitutes a genuine prerequisite for peace. Israeli Minister Natan
Sharansky represents this group. If and when a democratic Palestine
emerges, at least some of these conservatives will be prepared to
discuss far-reaching peace compromises, because they will have
confidence in the other side.

The American advocates of Palestinian regime reform, represented at the
highest ranks of the Bush administration, appear to parallel this third
group of ideological conservatives, both in the sincerity of their
demands and in their willingness to seek a fair peace deal once they
confront an improved Palestinian state.

How realistic are these sincere outside advocates of reform? White House
spokesman Ari Fleischer sought in early May to impose on the
Palestinians nothing less than "transparency, democracy, market economy,
good governance, lack of corruption." Where in the entire Arab world
does such a regime exist?

Finally, there are the advocates from within the Arab-Muslim camp. They
range from such Palestinian leaders as Abu Maazen (Mahmoud Abbas), who
rejects outside advice--"We do not listen to what the West is demanding.
However, we say that reform is the right thing to do"--to former
Indonesian President Abd a-Rahman Wahid: "I recommend to my Palestinian
brothers to get rid of Arafat's regime...But I don't see how the
Palestinian people can do so peacefully." Most Arab rulers are more
circumspect than Wahid, lest their demands on the Palestinians be seized
upon by their own constituencies and applied to themselves. Still, they
apparently recognize the need for the Arab world to take some initiative
in pressuring Arafat on reform.

The Israeli-Palestinian relationship has come a long way since former
Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin reassured Israelis that Arafat's
regime would be able to "deliver the goods" and apprehend Palestinian
terrorists better than Israel, precisely because Arafat would not be
encumbered by Israel's meddlesome High Court of Justice and human rights
advocacy organizations. Israel winked at Arafat's methods initially,
reminding itself that in any case it was fated to make peace with
dictatorial neighbor regimes. Now there is a growing awareness in many
circles--Israeli, Arab, American, European--that Arafat's tolerance of
corruption and indiscriminate violence is a major part of the problem.
Perhaps Ariel Sharon's only success in 15 months in office has been to
place Arafat's unsavory role on the international agenda.

Midst the talk of Arafat's many faults, we should also remind ourselves
that he and the Palestinian legislative council were elected in 1996 in
one of the freest elections the Arab world has ever witnessed; and that
the Palestinian press, alongside fierce anti-Israel incitement and
restrictions on Palestinian freedom of expression, also prints daily
translations of a variety of critical op-eds from the Israeli press. If
there is any Arab society with the motivation to build a working
democracy it is the Palestinians. The inside advocates deserve our
encouragement.

But not our intervention. An Israeli or American attempt to remove
Arafat by force, or "kick him upstairs" to a ceremonial position, is
almost certain to repeat the Lebanon fiasco and produce more, not less
violence. It would also set a dangerous example to the Middle East,
where the Arab masses in any case long ago concluded that the US has no
interest in instilling real democracy. In any case, Arafat can probably
be counted on in the short term to thwart all the schemes being hatched
in Washington and Jerusalem to democratize his regime and centralize
security control.

Those who are sincere about Palestinian regime reform must step back,
let Palestinians do it, and hope they succeed. Palestinians need to
sweep out the ills of Arafat's mafia rule because it serves their own
interests--not ours.

