Economics has always been crucial to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.
Since the beginning of the Israeli occupation of the West Bank, East
Jerusalem and Gaza Strip, Israel has pursued policies and practices of
the kind that brought Israel tremendous revenues. There is no doubt that
these economic benefits are among the factors why Israel insists on
maintaining the occupation and establishing facts on the ground that are
difficult to reverse, such as the confiscation of land for illegal
Jewish settlements.

Indeed, one of the most lucrative Israeli practices has been the theft
of water from reservoirs lying under the Palestinian territories. It was
no coincidence that Israel built settlements over almost all these
reservoirs and implemented policies that deprived the Palestinians from
access to that water. Independent research shows that the average water
consumption by a Jewish settler in the Palestinian territories is 20
times that the amount of water Palestinians are permitted to consume.

Another example of the economic advantages of occupation is the
convenience of the Palestinian population as a captive market for
Israeli products--to the extent that it remains Israel's second largest
market. Cheap Palestinian labor, at one time including some 200,000
laborers, did not require the same costly employment benefits that
Israeli employers would have had to pay to the Israeli equivalent. In
addition, Israel greatly benefited from tourism to Christian and Muslim
sites in the occupied towns of Jerusalem, Bethlehem and Jericho.

All of these economic goodies brought Israel to treat the Palestinian
territories as part of the Israeli market, maintaining one pricing
system within the two economies and insisting, during peace talks, on
creating a customs union. Any economic barriers or borders would be the
beginning of an independent Palestinian economy and the gradual decline
of Israeli economic benefits, or exploitation.

It is difficult, if not impossible, for the Palestinian economy to grow
and develop as long as it is completely integrated into the Israeli
economy. The huge disparities in the two economies perpetuate continued
Israeli exploitation. At the same time, there is no way for the
Palestinian economy to develop economic relations and exchange with the
Arab world as long as it is still integrated within the Israeli economy.

It can be also argued that maintaining close economic integration
between the Israeli and Palestinian economies offers two benefits to
Palestinians. First, it allows Palestinians to benefit from the Israeli
labor market and gain experience in advanced Israeli industries and
technology. Second, these economic relations can play a constructive
role in creating common interests towards future reconciliation. Joint
economic activities and economic relations can lead to a common vested
interest in peace and normal relations.

But while intensive economic integration between the two economies can
be useful for both sides, the exaggeration of the joint relationship
towards complete integration, a custom union and one pricing system
unfairly benefits Israel and maintains the feeling of exploitation among
Palestinians. This, in turn, will contribute negatively to the
Palestinian economy and prevent its development and rehabilitation,
which will in turn have a negative effect on any political effort
towards peace and reconciliation.

