Because of the great size disparity between the Palestinian and the
Israeli economies, the character of the economic relationship between
them is of much greater importance to the Palestinians than to Israel.
Decisions regarding this relationship should, therefore, be left in
their hands.

In view of the short distances between the population and business
centers of the two parties, the length and geographically convoluted
nature of the border between them, and the fact that there has been no
customs boundary between them in the last three decades, the desirable
trade arrangement for the Palestinians seems to be a customs union. This
allows the free movement of goods between the two parties, unhindered by
any economic control or barrier, but also requires imports from the rest
of the world to be taxed at the same rates in both.

The high probability of Israel not admitting Palestinian workers in
large numbers in the foreseeable future lends great importance to the
substitution of exports of Palestinian labor by exports of goods
produced by this labor in the Palestinian economy itself, which a
customs union will facilitate marketing in Israel. The security barrier
now being established creates a physical border that also makes feasible
various degrees of economic separation, such as a free trade area
agreement (FTA), or even a trade regime that does not discriminate at
all in favor of imports from the neighboring country.

The sharp economic decline in the Palestinian territories since Oslo,
following the deterioration in the security situation, has given rise
there to the mistaken impression that the cause of the economic troubles
is the customs union set up by it. This impression was furthered by a
World Bank study that failed to separate the impact of the closures and
the security restrictions from that of the customs union itself. But
whatever the result of the Palestinian debate on this matter, the two
economies seem bound to drift apart in the future.

It is difficult to envisage today a reasonable mechanism for joint
decisionmaking, such as a customs union requires, that would be
acceptable to both sides. Furthermore, the mutual lack of trust and the
perceived power imbalance can be expected to result in attempts by
individual Palestinians to evade the agreed upon rules, provoking an
over-reaction of the Israeli customs authorities that will impede trade
flows. The experience of the past two years might also make the
Palestinian authorities prefer an arrangement that does away with
Israel's power to withhold from the Palestinian treasury the customs and
VAT revenues collected for it by Israel.

Economic separation might, however, have serious adverse effects on the
Palestinian economy, making it undesirable for both the Palestinians and
Israel. Even if the slide toward it is unavoidable, all effort should be
made to minimize the damage it causes. In principle, the security
barrier can be consistent even with a customs union. But in practice, by
raising the transportation and transaction costs of Palestinian exports,
it renders them less profitable.

There are, on both sides, those who welcome the setting up of a physical
border as providing the opportunity for establishing the permanent
economic relationship on an FTA basis. Such an agreement allows each
party to pursue its own customs and indirect tax policies, but exempts
from customs duties goods produced in the other one. The definition of
what constitutes local production for this purpose greatly restricts the
import component that can be embodied in it. Palestinian exporters can
be expected to encounter considerable difficulties in satisfying the
Israeli authorities? demand of proof that their merchandise fulfills
these "rules of origin." These difficulties cannot be dismissed by
arguing that a physical border in any case creates a trade obstacle, as
the costs of obtaining certificates of origin, of their examination and
of the verification of the goods conforming to them raises this hurdle
further.

But the greatest danger in turning the physical border also into an
economic one, even within an FTA agreement, is that it will invite
pressures for the further widening of economic separation. There are
those in both economies who wish to be protected from competition from
the other. In particular, for some years already there have been calls
in the Palestinian economy to impose protective tariffs on "infant
industries," supposedly requiring a period of hothouse conditions to be
able to compete with Israel's. Such a step can be expected to raise a
demand for retaliation in the form of a protective tariff on Palestinian
goods, and pretty soon the FTA agreement might start to unravel in
practice, if not in theory.

There is no real alternative in sight today to the markets Israel
provided for the Palestinian economy. Restrictions on its access to them
are bound to take a heavy toll in poverty, misery and widespread
unemployment, making it imperative to minimize their scope.

