In 1990, when the thaw in relations between Israel and the Soviet Union
(soon to be succeeded by Russia) was just beginning, the Jaffee Center
hosted a groundbreaking visit to Israel by a delegation of very senior
Soviet intelligence officers. In the course of the visit I guided one of
them, deputy head of Soviet military intelligence (GRU), on a tour of
parts of the country. Driving down from Jerusalem to the Jordan
Valley/Dead Sea area, we pulled over at a good vantage point so I could
explain the terrain. My guest removed a map from his briefcase and asked
that I point out for him where we were standing.

I stared at the map in total disbelief. The borders outlined on it in
heavy purple lines, crisscrossing Palestine/Eretz Yisrael in roughly
triangular shapes, were not Israel's borders; yet they looked vaguely
familiar.

"Where did you get this map?" I asked.

"I removed it from the wall of my office in GRU headquarters in Moscow",
replied the affable lieutenant general. "This is our standard map".

"But these are the 1947 partition borders", I protested. "They were
never operative. Where are the 1948 armistice lines, the green line?"

He found them for me, etched onto the map in a near invisible dotted
line. I recovered my composure and asked for his map as a souvenir,
offering to buy him a new, up to date one in return. Except that I
couldn't find an Israeli map that showed the green line. In the
post-1967 era we had blotted out the armistice lines, the effective
border between 1948 and 1967, in order to show all of Palestine under
our control, from the Mediterranean to the Jordan River.

What can we learn from this joint exercise in the politicization of maps
of Israel's borders? For years Soviet intelligence apparently based its
assessments of the Israel-Arab situation on jaded and inoperative
concepts like the 1947 lines--which may explain why it was so frequently
wrong and misleading in its behavior toward its Arab allies, as in the
1967 Six-Day War. Israel, on the other hand, elected after 1967 to
ignore the extraordinary permanency of the 1948 armistice lines. Only
now, some 37 years later, are legal and international pressures and the
vicissitudes of yet another Jewish-Arab war reminding us of the enduring
relevancy of the green line.

The 1947 lines are indeed dead. So is almost everything else outlined in
UN General Assembly Resolution 181
                                            of November 29, 1947. A
large part of UNGAR 181 is devoted to an Arab-Jewish two-state economic
union (that includes an abortive third entity, the "Special
International Regime for the City of Jerusalem"); rereading it today
reminds one of the failed economic integration provisions of the 1993
Oslo Accords and brings a wry smile to one's face. Another major segment
describes in great detail what those impossible 1947 borders would look
like--borders so impractical and unrealistic that they never saw the
light of day.

What remains valid is the history-making, all-important heart of UNGAR
181: the establishment in Mandatory Palestine of "Independent Arab and
Jewish States". And not just any Jewish state. For while at the outset
Israel would have roughly equal Arab and Jewish populations, UNGAR 181
clearly demands that the British hasten to evacuate a "seaport and
hinterland" to facilitate "substantial [Jewish] immigration", thereby
making clear its intention that the Jewish state indeed be Jewish in
nature.

This explains why UNGAR 181 has in recent years regained a place of
distinction in the Israeli collective consciousness. In May 1948 Jews
danced in the streets of Tel Aviv to celebrate the first Jewish state in
nearly 2000 years. Some 57 years later Israelis confront the dramatic
failure of the Oslo process, and particularly the ongoing Palestinian
insistence that Israel recognize the right of return of the 1948
refugees, and sense that the current crisis is largely connected to the
inability of the Palestinian national leadership, then as now, to come
to terms with the real meaning of the partition of Palestine and the
creation by the international community of separate Jewish and Arab
states in the two peoples' historic homeland.

Were Israel to recognize the right of return of those refugees to its
sovereign territory, even "in principle" as Palestinian moderates
insist, it would be implicitly acknowledging that in 1947 a Jewish state
was born in sin, and implicitly agreeing that there be one and a half
Palestinian states and only half a Jewish state. That is not what UNGAR
181 intended. Everything in the logic of UNGAR 181 points to the "Arab
state" in historic Palestine as the place where Palestinian refugees
should be absorbed, just as UNGAR 181 deliberately laid the foundations
for the absorption of Jewish refugees in the Jewish state.

What remains is for Israel to remove settlements and withdraw more or
less to the 1967 lines, thereby ensuring that Israel remains a Jewish
state and that a viable Palestinian state can emerge. Only then will
there truly be "Arab and Jewish States" here.

