Most nations have heroes who occupy a central place in their national
narrative. Heroes are made, and remade, especially after their death.
Arafat was already well on his way to becoming a Palestinian icon during
his life. These processes will be completed soon after his death.

Yet what he ultimately stood for will be contested. His legacy will be
claimed by different groups and parties, including those who opposed him
politically at some point or another, and by various factions within his
own party, Fateh. Arafat will continue to play a political role after
his death.

For in spite of his long career, his death clearly portrays an
unfinished journey: he died in Paris; official ceremonies were held in
Cairo and not in Palestine, and he was buried "temporarily" in Ramallah.
Any final peace agreement between Palestinians and Israelis will have to
allow for an appropriate final resting place for Arafat in Jerusalem.

It is also clear that Palestinians will be entering a new phase in their
political life. Two broad issues will dominate in the near and longer
term: the fate of the political process with Israel, and the nature of
the Palestinian political system in the post-Arafat era.

Initial assessments made soon after Arafat's death about possibilities
now open for progress in negotiations with Israel have a short-term
focus but no strategic significance. For even if one were to suppose
that another interim arrangement is made between the new Palestinian
leadership and the Israeli government, the seeds of conflict will
remain, all the more so because of the separation wall that will become
a focus for continued protest and resistance.

The new Palestinian leadership may have some political leeway in the
immediate future to continue steps started by the intercession of Egypt,
especially if there is a higher degree of American and European
involvement. Ultimately, however, gradual political restraints will be
placed on the new leadership due to the increased political influence of
varied contenders for power who will assume a more prominent role after
the death of Arafat. In his lifetime, he could not be challenged on
power sharing by other groups. The new Palestinian leadership will be in
a far weaker position in the face of such demands and ultimately may
have to accede to them, at least partially.

But the main longer-term constraint and challenge for any new
Palestinian leadership is whether it may possibly have an Israeli
partner in any future government of Israel. There is no reason to
believe that such a leadership will be able to "sell" to Palestinians
what an Israeli government is likely to offer. The internal Israeli
political scene will remain deadlocked on the issue of where to draw the
line territorially for the end of the Zionist project in historic
Palestine unless there is consistent outside pressure that could
influence Israeli public opinion in a leftist direction. This does not
appear likely under the Bush administration. Any interim arrangement
will therefore keep the seeds of conflict smoldering.

The nature of the political and administrative system of the Palestinian
Authority after Arafat is the second main challenge where changes are to
be expected. As most Palestinians agree, no one person will be able to
replace Arafat. In addition, he created under the PA a
de-institutionalized mode of government where the informal system
predominated over the formal system. His system of patronage and
clientism tied ultimately to himself resulted in his being the glue that
bound the system. His departure may well result in the fragmentation of
his own party, Fateh, and various centers of power in the PA as well.

The new leadership is very keenly aware of this, but it remains to be
seen how successful it will be in holding things together in the coming
weeks and months. Centralizing the various security services under one
command will not by itself be enough. This is an Israeli requirement but
is not the only element of reform required from a Palestinian point of
view. Without rule of law and a reformed court system, there is a danger
that Palestinians will be governed by security organizations. In terms
of priority, rule of law comes first.

Beyond a short transition period, the issue of the legitimacy of the
government will come up. The demand for elections has already been
raised in the past year and more persistently than at any time before.
If elections for a new representative council are not held soon, the
legitimacy of the government will be undermined and wide rifts in
society will open. The new leadership will be too weak to stem what will
be a swelling tide. This will also be a political decision that Israel
and the US will have to take, i.e., whether to facilitate elections or not.

Ultimately, issues related to reform and democratization in the
Palestinian context will not be separate from issues related to national
rights. No Palestinian leadership will be able to govern democratically
if it is perceived by Palestinians to be making undue concessions on
such rights. This will also be seen as the heritage of Arafat who died
while under siege in Ramallah. His burial site will remain a potent,
visible, and concrete reminder.

