Different people will remember President Yasser Arafat in different
ways, but there are three major achievements Palestinians at least agree
are an undeniable part of his legacy.

The first is the transformation in the eyes of the world of the
Palestinian cause in the early 1960s. Some 800,000 Palestinians had
become homeless and stateless refugees after 1948 and were scattered all
across the Arab world. Their case then was seen as a problem to be
solved through humanitarian assistance. It was through Arafat's efforts,
and through the efforts of the Fateh movement that he founded, that the
Palestinian issue was transformed into that of a people struggling for
their political and national rights. For Palestinians, this also
involved unifying people behind one political line and within one
organizational framework, which was the PLO.

Arafat's second and most important achievement came during the 1970s and
1980s when he oversaw the change in the collective political thinking of
the Palestinian people from struggling to achieve their absolute and
historical rights to historic Palestine into a struggle for a solution
based on international legality. This involved the historical compromise
of a two-state solution as defined by the borders of 1967. That
transformation came about as a result of the reality that Israel itself
was recognized internationally as defined by those borders while
international law considered the West Bank, the Gaza Strip and East
Jerusalem as being under a belligerent, military occupation.

This transformation, furthermore, led to the Palestinian national
movement achieving international recognition and forced Israel to sit at
negotiating tables with Palestinian delegations designated by the PLO,
first at the Madrid conference in 1991 and later in Oslo. This process,
in turn, enabled Arafat to sign several accords with Israel.

The third major achievement Palestinians credit President Arafat with is
his resistance, while under considerable pressure at the final status
negotiations at Camp David in 2000, to sign any solution that involved
compromising the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people as
guaranteed by international law. In other words, he refused to
compromise the compromise. His refusal to do so led to the war Israel
launched against him and his people four years ago as punishment for his
integrity, and which in the end he paid for personally by being confined
in his headquarters for three years.

The absence of Arafat is not good news for Palestinians or Israelis
interested in a peace between the two sides based on the historic
two-state compromise. Arafat may turn out to have been the only
Palestinian leader with the strength and credibility to deliver. Arafat
carried huge political weight that he used internally to bolster the
peace camp. His absence will contribute to the ongoing shift in the
balance of power between that peace camp and the opposition. His absence
represents a missed and historic opportunity for all concerned. Indeed,
the enormous international interest in Arafat in the past few weeks and
the wall-to-wall coverage of his funeral proves conclusively that all
the efforts of Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to marginalize and
demonize Arafat have been in vain.

But amid all this coverage was the suggestion, repeatedly raised by
diplomats and analysts, that the absence of Arafat will be an
opportunity for peace. It's useful here to note two things. First, the
successors to Arafat have more or less the same politics as he did. In
any negotiations they will hold the same positions, though they may do
so in a different style, with a different approach and employing
different tactics. I think Sharon knows this very well, and it explains
why he should already be so busy making excuses for the post-Arafat era
in which his primary justification for not meeting his obligations under
the US-sponsored roadmap plan for peace can no longer be used.

Secondly, the huge popular turnout for Arafat's burial, and the emotive
response in general by Palestinians to his passing, is also a message to
the new leadership that the people were behind not only Arafat the man,
but also his politics. It is a message the leadership cannot ignore.

Most analysts seem to be focusing on internal Palestinian politics and
dynamics when peering into the post-Arafat era. But it is not all about
the Palestinians. If Israel continues its gradual and systematic attempt
to cause the collapse of the Palestinian Authority, the new leadership
will fail and Sharon will again be released from his obligations. This
was already happening under Arafat. November marks the first month the
PA has been unable to pay its employees on time. Only the illness and
death of the president prevented employees of all local authorities from
going on strike.

In this context there is a vital role to be played by the international
community in ensuring the success of the new leadership. For a start,
the international community, including the Arab world, must increase the
economic and technical support extended to the Palestinian people, half
of whom now live in poverty as a result of the almost daily Israeli
military incursions and destruction of Palestinian infrastructure. The
Authority will not be successful in stabilizing the security or the
political situation with an unemployment rate that hovers between
one-third and one-fourth of the labor force.

Nor can the new leadership consolidate its power if Israel continues its
attacks on Palestinians and its settlement expansions, Israeli policies
that only serve to justify violent reactions from Palestinian opposition
groups. In this regard, the international community needs to seriously
renew a peace process to provide political prospects to the Palestinian
people and empower the new leadership to justify itself and its role.

The new Palestinian leadership is certainly going to exploit the renewed
international interest and invite Israel to direct and immediate
negotiations on the basis of the roadmap. The time is ripe for a major
international initiative into which the re-elected American
administration is ready to invest major political capital of the kind
that will convince or pressure Israel to abide by the obligations of the
roadmap. Those obligations include an "immediate end to violence against
Palestinians everywhere" and a "freeze on all kinds settlement
activity," while entering into serious political negotiations for a
final settlement. Such compliance is the only way to enable the new
Palestinian leadership to fulfill its obligations under the roadmap
including stopping "all acts of violence against Israelis anywhere," in
addition to proceeding with the ongoing reform program and finalizing
preparations for elections.

