Of the three leaders whose vision of a Palestinian state we are
examining--Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat, United States President
George W. Bush, and Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon--Bush's vision
of a Palestinian state is the clearest. On June 24, 2002
                                            , he stated that "the
Israeli occupation that began in 1967 will be ended through a settlement
. . . with Israeli withdrawal to secure and recognized borders." On
April 14, 2004                                                   , he
added the "establishment of a Palestinian state and the settling of
Palestinian refugees there, rather than in Israel," and indicated that
Israel should be allowed to annex the major settlement blocs.

From an Israeli standpoint, this is a realistic formula. While it is not
as detailed as the Clinton plan of December 2000
                                               , and though it prejudges
issues best left by a US president to the parties themselves to resolve,
the real problem with the Bush vision is not its content so much as the
absence of a concerted presidential determination to pressure the
parties into reaching any settlement at all.

Arafat's vision is the least clear. Ostensibly he aspires to a two-state
solution based on the 1967 lines, including in Jerusalem. This is what
the now defunct Oslo process was all about. But in the course of final
status negotiations in 2000-2001, and particularly since their collapse
in failure, Arafat has presented positions on the Temple Mount/Harem
al-Sharif and the refugee right of return issue that call into question
his commitment to any genuine two-state solution, which must be based on
at least an acquiescence in Israel's self-definition as a Jewish state.

By denying any Jewish historic/religious link whatsoever to the Temple
Mount, Arafat appears to be saying (and he has said this in other ways
many times) that the Jews as a people have no legitimate roots in Eretz
Yisrael/Palestine. By insisting that Israel recognize the right of
return of 1948 refugees, he is understood by many Israelis to be
undermining the foundations of a two-state solution based on the
recommendation by the United Nations in 1947 (General Assembly
Resolution 181)                                             that there
should come into existence separate Jewish and Arab states in mandatory
Palestine. An unwarranted admission by Israel that it was "born in sin"
is hardly a healthy foundation for a future two-state relationship.

Arafat's real intentions regarding a resolution of the conflict are the
subject of intense debate in Israel. His tolerance for the use of
violence against Israel--particularly his encouragement of "martyrdom
operations"--complicates the issue. Probably the ultimate reason why no
clear determination can be made is that his penchant for lying has
destroyed his credibility, and not only in Israeli circles.
Consequently, making sense of Arafat's position is no longer a political
imperative, but rather an academic exercise.

Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's position appears to be changing.
Over the years Sharon consistently presented a map of final status based
on minimum territory and maximum fragmentation of the Palestinian
entity--which, in recent years, he has agreed to call a state.
Settlements were the primary vehicle for fragmenting the land and
ensuring an ongoing Israeli grip on the main roads and hilltops, as well
as on greater Jerusalem, the Jordan Valley, and the western Samaria
settlement blocs.

But Sharon's readiness to evacuate the entirety of the Gaza Strip
indicates that he has softened his approach. Until very recently, Sharon
argued that Gaza would be divided into three Palestinian enclaves that
were separated by the settlements of Netzarim and Kfar Darum and reduced
in size by the remaining settlements. Moreover, the projected removal of
four isolated settlements in northern Samaria in the West Bank points to
a possible readiness to afford the mountain heartland area a degree of
genuine territorial continuity through the removal of additional
settlements further south.

Sharon still appears to insist on holding onto the Jordan Valley,
thereby radically reducing the Palestinian land mass and cutting it off
from direct contact with the Arab world. Yet in Gaza he has indicated
that he is inclined, in cooperation with Egypt, eventually to abandon
the Philadelphi road and allow Gazans unfettered access to the Egyptian
Sinai. Judging by pronouncements from Ehud Olmert, the deputy prime
minister who in recent months has "fronted" for some of Sharon's new
positions, even Sharon's approach to greater Jerusalem may be softening.

While Sharon's vision appears to be changing for the better, it is
hardly a blueprint for a successful two-state solution. Moreover Sharon,
like Arafat, has a credibility problem; many who have watched him
perform over the decades, and particularly in the past three years,
still expect him to sabotage his own disengagement plan.

This analysis leads us once again to the recognition that none of the
three relevant leaders has a realistic peace strategy, meaning both a
realistic map and the necessary determination to implement it. One can
only hope that Bush in a second term, or Kerry if elected, will evince
that determination. Sharon's views may be evolving, but for the time
being--and assuming Sharon is serious--they appear to be adapted
primarily to unilateral action. And Arafat appears to be a lost cause.

