As Israel developed its strategic relationship with Palestinian leader
Yasir Arafat and the Palestine Liberation Organization over the past
nine years, two key security concepts were paramount. Both were
cultivated by the mainstream "security dove" camp led by prime ministers
Yitzhak Rabin, Ehud Barak and others.

The first concept held that the Oslo process would turn Israel and the
PLO into strategic allies in the fight against Islamic extremist
terrorism. Israel would turn over territories to Arafat, and the PLO
would suppress Hamas and Islamic Jihad. At times this worked, and at
times not. Since September 2000, when the current armed uprising broke
out, this concept is a shambles. Arafat bears much of the blame, insofar
as he clearly maintains an ongoing inclination to use or threaten force
as an instrument of negotiation, and refuses to suppress his Islamic
rejectionist camp. Where Israel has failed to carry out its Oslo
obligations, e.g., regarding the ceasing of settlement building, it also
bears a degree of blame for not providing Arafat with minimal
incentives. The current Sharon government, which has no real strategy of
peace, is the product of Arafat's strategy of violence--not the cause.

The second concept, first enunciated by Rabin and later embraced
prominently by Barak, concerns the "window of opportunity." It holds
that Israel is faced with long term existential, non-conventional
threats from the periphery--Iran and Iraq--and from allied Islamic and
other radical forces. Making peace with the Palestinians will not
necessarily silence those threats, but by shoring up the inner circle of
peace, Israel will be far better situated to deal with the outer circle.
Indeed, an atmosphere of peace, however cold and problematic, will
encourage neighboring moderate countries that are also threatened by
Iran, Iraq and extremist Islam to rebuff those threats, and perhaps even
to make common cause with Israel and the United States against them.
This was the dominant strategy behind Rabin's decision to engage the
PLO--undeniably a problematic partner from the start--and to offer
painful concessions in an effort to neutralize Israel's Palestinian
front. Barak's decision to withdraw from Lebanon in May 2000 largely
neutralized the threat from Hizballah, Iran's local proxy.

Nothing that Arafat did throughout the interim process contradicted this
strategic approach from Israel's standpoint. But in July 2000, under
pressure of final status talks, Arafat began evincing extreme positions
regarding core Israeli issues: the right of return and the Jewish link
to the Temple Mount/Haram a-Sharif. This signaled to many Israelis that
a peace deal with him might never be possible. Still, it made sense to
continue to view Arafat as Israel's default partner for negotiations,
even if these might produce only interim arrangements for the near future.

Then came Israel's encounter with the Karine A weapons ship. There can
be no doubt that Arafat, who only two years ago claimed that Iran was
trying to have him assassinated, was involved with this smuggling
operation. From Israel's standpoint, the moment Arafat and the PLO
leadership link up with the dominant and extremist wing of the Iranian
leadership led by Hamenei, who calls for the total destruction of
Israel, and with Hizballah, the window of opportunity concept becomes
meaningless, for the Iranian threat is literally at our doorstep. Not
only Israel but Egypt and Jordan, too, who have good reason to fear
Iran's intentions toward them, and the US, may now have to reassess
their relationship with Arafat and the PLO.

Israel has a limited strategic relationship with Egypt. It is based on
the "no more war" principle, and on close ties to the West. While Egypt
continues to view Israel as a potential rival for regional influence and
conceives of peace very differently than Israel, the relationship has
proven remarkably stable militarily, even in these trying times. Israel
and Jordan have a strategic relationship based on a shared regional
threat assessment and shared concern over possible future Palestinian
nationalist expansionism. The ramifications of the Karine A affair
potentially complement both relationships.

In past decades Arafat wore out his welcome in Jordan and Lebanon not
only because he continually reneged on agreements, but primarily because
of the strategic threat he posed. He is in real danger of repeating the
mistake. Most Israelis have now given up any hope that he can be a
partner in a genuine strategic scheme of Israeli-Palestinian
coexistence. At the current juncture, what allows him to remain in
Ramallah is his ongoing legitimacy as the accepted leader of the
Palestinians and the fear of chaos should he depart. But in the
post-September 11 world, a new standard of legitimacy is liable to
decide his fate.

Meanwhile, Israel has an ongoing strategic interest, independent of
Palestinian designs, in ensuring its own demographic security and
democratic underpinnings by ending the occupation and dismantling
settlements. In the current reality this increasingly points to a
strategy of unilateral withdrawal. Yet unilateral measures are not on
the agenda of Prime Minister Sharon, who covets the occupied territories
and cultivates the settlements.

Hence all we can hope for at the moment is that, through the good
offices of General Zinni and others, we can maintain a tactical
Israeli-Palestinian relationship, devoid of trust and of strategic
understandings, and dedicated to ensuring minimum regional
destabilization and minimal violence, until the Arafat era has
passed.

