The near-total Israeli reoccupation of the West Bank and parts of the
Gaza Strip has interrupted all aspects of Palestinian life, and resulted
in tremendous material and psychological damage to Palestinian society.
No one wants to believe that we are back to square one after our
ten-year investment in the peace process. Most Palestinians are very
pessimistic and feel that the peace process is actually over, at the
time when it could have resulted in a total withdrawal of Israeli forces
from the West Bank and Gaza Strip.

Instead, we are faced with Israeli control, incessant military damage
and a curfew unprecedented even in the early days of the Israeli
occupation. The implications seem to be that the Palestinian Authority
no longer exists and cannot provide any of the services that it should
provide, according to the Oslo accords.

We have arrived at this destination because the peace camps on both the
Israeli and Palestinian sides committed semi-suicide. Former Israeli
Prime Minister Ehud Barak showed positive signs toward compromise at
Camp David, as did Palestinians. But just as we were close to a complete
package that would have ended the occupation and established a
Palestinian state, Barak permitted Ariel Sharon's provocative visit to
Al Aqsa mosque, and launched his "revenge" on Palestinians, giving a
free hand to his military forces to kill Palestinian demonstrators
everywhere and provoking more protests and reactions on the Palestinian
side.

When Palestinians resorted to military means, especially against Israeli
civilians, they sent the wrong message to the Israeli public, aiding the
Israeli Likud propaganda stating that Palestinians do not want peace.
Together, Barak and Palestinian military reactions actually assisted the
Likud and Ariel Sharon in coming to power. With the election of Sharon,
we were then faced with an individual who has always viewed the peace
process as his own personal nightmare. On his initiative, the
confrontations have only grown more fiery and grave.

But Sharon's military solution will not bring the Israeli public the
security it seeks. Nor do Palestinians have any other way of achieving
their rights than through peace negotiations. As long as he is given
pretext, Sharon will not allow any serious negotiations with
Palestinians. He will continue to create obstacles to restarting talks,
obstacles that will endure even after he is gone from the scene.

I believe that we are looking at the prolonging of this terrible
situation of confrontation, an atmosphere that will aid the Likud in
diverting public opinion from seeing its settlements, land
confiscations, demolition of the Palestinian economy and deprivation of
Palestinians of managing everything--down to the minutes of their every
day. Now that we may witness a war against Iraq, Sharon will be free
beneath this smokescreen to commit all the crimes he has dreamed of. His
fantasies, I fear, are much more vast than the crimes he has already
carried out.

We should observe that fundamentalists on the Palestinian side are a
counterpart to the fundamentalists on the Israeli side. All Likud
actions are actually encouraging and feeding the politics of Palestinian
and Arab fundamentalist movements, and visa versa. We must break this
vicious cycle, where the silent majority is stuck in the middle. There
must be a joint struggle between the peace camp on the Israeli side
towards ending the Sharon era on the one hand, and the Palestinian peace
camp towards securing power in the next elections, on the other. The end
of the Sharon government, the end of the confusion in Palestinian
politics and the realization of discipline in the Palestinian struggle
are key steps toward the resumption of the peace process.

These are not easy tasks for either the Israeli peace camp, or its
Palestinian counterpart. Since Sharon has determinant control over
events, he can continue feeding the vicious cycle of violence and
bloodshed. That situation could lead the Palestine Liberation
Organization to dissolve the Palestinian National Authority in order to
break the cycle.

In this situation where the Palestinian National Authority has been for
so long in a position where it cannot protect its citizens, and the
Israeli government deigns to respect any agreements signed with the PLO,
it would be better to ask the international community to shoulder its
responsibility of protecting the Palestinian people. Sharon's military
power politics game is to paralyze the Palestinian National Authority,
and hold it responsible for the actions of every Palestinian.
Regrettably, the United States administration buys Sharon's charges
(even as it knows the Authority is paralyzed) and is asking the
Authority to stop Palestinians' military reactions and "invest 100
percent effort."

One way of beating this game would have been to dissolve the Palestinian
Authority, and ask for international intervention to fill the vacuum. If
the PLO chooses to go down this avenue, however, it must coordinate its
actions with the United Nations, Europe, the Arab countries, Russia and
the United States. These concerned parties should be asked to create an
interim United Nations government to fill the vacuum and provide
protection to the Palestinian people. This government should prepare for
the establishment of a Palestinian state according to the American
vision based on Security Council Resolutions 242 and 338. It is obvious
that Israel will resist any international intervention, and will try to
revive the Israeli "civil administration" to fill the vacuum. This
situation will put Israel once again in the position where it cannot use
F-16s, Apache helicopters and tanks on a civilian population--a position
that was once condemned and rejected by the entire world and the
majority of Israelis.

