A Palestinian state seems to be the only part of the future
Israeli-Palestinian agreement that is agreed on by all relevant parties:
Israel, the Palestinians, the United States, and the rest of the
international community. The agreement, however, is superficial. When we
look beneath the surface to understand the parties' concept of the
Palestinian statehood part of the solution, we find differences so
significant as to render their agreement on a Palestinian state
completely meaningless.

Each party to the conflict has its own final status concept, but each
calls it a Palestinian state. When the Palestinians speak of statehood,
they mean the complete Israeli withdrawal from all the territories
occupied in 1967, including East Jerusalem. They expect to practice
their right of self-determination by establishing an independent,
sovereign, and contiguous state that can live in peace with its neighbor
Israel alongside the borders of 1967.

For Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and the current right-wing
extremist government in Israel, the solution is simply autonomy
arrangements on the minimum possible part of the territories that
encompasses the maximum possible number of Palestinians. The Palestinian
entity would have no real sovereignty and include no part of East
Jerusalem. Sharon doesn't mind calling this a Palestinian state.

The American concept of the Palestinian state fluctuates according to
changes in the Israeli government's composition and positions. While
there is a certain level of American influence on Israel, to a large
extent the American position and extent of maneuvering vis-a-vis the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict is a function of the Israeli position or
extent to which the particular Israeli government can go.

For all of these reasons, it is not very significant that the different
parties to the conflict support the idea of a Palestinian state. What
counts, instead, is whether or not they agree on two things: (1)
willingness to end the occupation, the ultimate source of violence and
instability, especially since the Palestinians are determined to
continue with the legitimate struggle until the end of this occupation;
and (2) willingness to implement the relevant stipulations of
international law vis-a-vis the conflict. So far the differences on
these two issues are very wide. This explains the ferocity of the
confrontations between the sides. 

