In the winter of 2001, shortly before Ariel Sharon defeated Ehud Barak
in elections for prime minister, I had the opportunity in person to hear
his vision of a Palestinian state. He removed a large map of the Land of
Israel from a corner cabinet in his modest Likud headquarters office in
Tel Aviv and pointed to the areas he proposed annexing to Israel. Moving
from north to south, the pointer in his hand went from the Ariel bloc
deep in Samaria to greater Jerusalem, and from there to the Etzion bloc
and Hebron. Then the pointer hovered over the Jordan Valley, from Bet
Shean to the Dead Sea. These regions, Sharon explained, are vital for
Israel's security. They must not be conceded even in return for the best
of peace agreements.

I asked Sharon if he knew any Palestinian who would suffice with a state
made up of three enclaves bereft of territorial contiguity. He replied
that that problem had preoccupied Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) when he
examined the very same map during one of his visits to Sycamore Ranch.
"I told him," Sharon related, "that there are places where we drive
underneath Palestinian territory, such as the tunnel road to the Etzion
bloc. We can implement the same arrangement-tunnels or bridges-in other
places as well."

In the course of time, following the presentation of his vision of a
Palestinian state by United States President George W. Bush, Prime
Minister Sharon termed this idea (which in private conversations he used
to compare to the "bantustan" model of apartheid in South Africa)
"transportation contiguity." Such semantic exercises serve Sharon in
bridging between the aspiration that Israel hold onto at least half the
West Bank, the international consensus that the Palestinians deserve an
independent state, and Israel's demographic interest. After the Oslo
accord, Sharon gradually recognized that terms like "self government"
and "autonomy" had become outmoded as models for a long-term solution.
He realized that the interim agreement had in fact turned areas A into
autonomous regions, and that under final status it would be necessary to
go one step further.

Sharon's decision to pronounce the words "Palestinian state" was greeted
in Israel and the world with great excitement; it even helped pave the
way for the Labor party to join Sharon's first government. So joyful was
the response that the public failed to notice that, beyond the headline,
it was hard to find in the details of Sharon's plan any resemblance to
the standard definition of a "state". Few, for example, bothered to
search the globe for a sovereign state all of whose land links to the
outside world were controlled by another state. (Sharon insists that
even under final status Israel will control the "Palestinian state's"
land, air, and naval border transit points.) The proof that nothing has
changed is provided by the course of the separation fence and the
never-ending expansion of the settlements in the three areas that Sharon
seeks to annex to Israel. And even this meager "state" would be
permitted by Sharon to emerge only after 15, 20 or even 50 years of
interim arrangements.

It is hard to find any bridge that could conceivably link Sharon's
vision of a Palestinian state to that of Palestinian leader Yasser
Arafat. The latter's room for flexibility does not exceed two or three
percent of West Bank territory, and even that would be part of a
one-on-one swap in terms of the size and quality of land involved. The
Palestinian approach has not changed since the Algiers declaration of
1988 that adopted UN Security Council resolutions 242
                                            and 338
                                           . Then the Palestinian
National Council gave Arafat a mandate to make concessions only against
the PLO's original demands for "greater Palestine" and for total
compliance with the right of return of the 1948 refugees. Throughout all
the final status discussions, from the talks that preceded the Camp
David summit in July 2000 through the Geneva accord
                                               of late 2003, not a
single Palestinian negotiator was prepared even to look at a map that
did not give the Palestinian state territorial contiguity and full
access to its capital in East Jerusalem.

The letter of April 14, 2004
                                                   that President Bush
delivered to Sharon in order to help him gain Likud approval for the
disengagement plan indicates that Bush's vision of a Palestinian state
is closer to that of Arafat. Bush rejected Sharon's request to cancel
the administration's opposition to the expansion of settlements in the
three settlement blocs. He sufficed with recognition of the demographic
reality created in the territories since 1967. That reality can be
translated into a final status agreement for the establishment of a
Palestinian state in 94-96 percent of the territories, with fair land
swaps. That was the vision of President Bill Clinton--which was thwarted
by violence and shortsightedness.

