Q: There was a lot of talk about a new era and an end of
violence at the Sharm al Sheikh summit. What did you make of the summit?

A: On the one hand we don't want to overload it with
significance and unrealistic expectations. On the other, we mustn't
underestimate or undervalue the significance of having a period in which
there is no violence and in which there is a commitment by the Israeli
occupation and the Palestinians not to resort to violence. A period of
quiet is sine qua non for changing the dynamic on the ground and for
generating a whole new modus operandi, which we hope will be a
substantive peace process.

Q: But in order to ensure a period of quiet, certain things
would need to happen on the ground immediately, wouldn't you agree?

A: Yes, absolutely. Quiet doesn't come out of the blue,
particularly when you have a military occupation. What you need is for
Israel to refrain from conducting any kind of violence or aggression or
escalation, including things like assassinations, the incursions, but
also lifting the siege, and making moves like the release of prisoners
and cessation of building of the wall and settlement activities.

So there is a need to show seriousness of intent and good will on the
one hand, and on the other, if there is a period of calm, that has to be
invested in qualitative and strategic moves ahead, and not exploited in
order to create facts that are more detrimental toward peace.

Q: There was a big disagreement over the proposed release
of 900 prisoners, which would have been the biggest release since the
intifada began. How important is this issue and why?

A: It is important to Palestinians. It cannot be seen as a deal
breaker, but at the same time it is a significant moral, legal,
political and human issue. This touches almost every Palestinian home.
Palestinian prisoners are perceived by all Palestinians not just as
heroic but as political prisoners, and therefore they have the right to
be included in any political agreement. [A significant release] will
improve the climate substantially and show Israeli willingness to
reciprocate in a positive way to the Palestinians.

The problem has always been that Israel has unilaterally decided on the
criteria for prisoner release and cynically manipulated this very human
condition, in terms of releasing prisoners accused of crimes and
misdemeanors, those in Israel without permit, or those who were due to
be released anyway. They have shown they are capable of manipulating the
situation and this has backfired, it has generated tremendous anger and
a sense of betrayal among the Palestinians. So now it is important that
the criteria are agreed to, that the Palestinians indicate very
clearly--this started way back in the pre-Madrid peace talks--that
prisoners released include older prisoners, prisoners since before 1993,
women prisoners, prisoners who are not well, youth and underage
prisoners, without the imposed criteria of "blood on their hands", or
any type of separation on the basis of political affiliation.

Q: You mentioned the wall. Surely that is a huge obstacle,
at least in the medium term if not in the short term?

A: It's a strategic issue, actually. The wall, the settlements,
Jerusalem, these are core substantive issues. Israel is creating facts
that will be irreversible and will render any future agreement
unrealistic or unworkable. The wall is a key issue. The wall around
Jerusalem and the settlements around Jerusalem are an embodiment of a
situation that undermines prospects of peace in the future. There you
have a land grab, there you have the isolation of Jerusalem and steps
that prejudge the issue of Jerusalem, and you have a siege that destroys
normal life and economic endeavors. So this is a real test, and this is
something that third parties are called on to address. That's why we are
wondering whether it's the Arab countries that want to be involved, or
the Americans who are expressing a willingness to reengage, or the
Quartet that is supposed to meet on the sidelines of the London meeting.
All of these are supposed to address these core issues. The question is
not just a first modest step of a cessation of violence, but preventing
violations and the distortions of strategic and core issues in the
meantime. This requires an act of will and positive engagement,
particularly on the wall and the settlements around Jerusalem.

Q: This also begs the question of how far Palestinians can
expect the Israelis to go right now. The Israelis will claim there are
political pressures on the government and they can only go so far.

A: That is true, but there are more lethal pressures internally
among the Palestinians. The question is not whether Israel will use a
domestic situation as an excuse to hold back, but rather whether the
Israeli government will lead and take positions that will further the
cause of peace. There is also a certain leverage that can be used by the
US in particular and other friends and allies of Israel if they are
committed to peace.

Q: There is also an internal Palestinian dynamic, and the
factions have apparently committed themselves to a period of calm but
not a ceasefire. How will this play out?

A: I see this commitment as crucial. To be very frank, I think
we have to move beyond factional politics and act as a democracy with
institutions and with the rule of law. We are not here dealing with
armed resistance and factional politics as the only defining forms of
our political reality. There is a clear situation of nation-building, of
institution-building, of rule of law, of an inclusive democracy and
elections that are delivering an accountable and representative
government. We cannot have individual factions or groups decide that
they can give themselves the right to act on behalf of the people, or
the right to act unilaterally, or the right to formulate policies on
their own that can undermine national policies. So the commitment to a
period of calm is crucial, it is important, it shows responsibility and
engagement. But it has to develop into a modus operandi where respect
for pluralistic democracy and the rule of law is displayed by everyone
concerned.

Q: Hamas appears poised to enter Legislative Council
elections. How important would such a step be?

A: It is important. This means there is a gradual
transformation, that Hamas is more and more engaged in the political
realities of the domestic situation in Palestine, that they are willing
to be part of a democracy that would allow for pluralism and peaceful
expression of disagreement and dissent, and certainly would look at the
source of legitimacy as being the constituency and the people rather
than a unilateral definition of power.

So in that sense it is important. It consolidates the nation-building
process, it creates an inclusive political system and helps Palestinian
democracy. And of course it creates a system of checks-and-balances
internally.

Q: Are you optimistic the ceasefire will lead us somewhere
substantial?

A: Not by itself. Not by default. You need to sustain it but
also move ahead. The status quo is untenable. The ceasefire cannot last
forever. There has to be a process with substance, with credibility, and
with the ability to influence reality on the ground, as well as the
political will to move ahead rapidly on substantive issues.

