The Israeli reoccupation of most of the Palestinian territories, once
under Palestinian Authority control according to the Oslo agreements,
has created some significant questions about what comes next.

Prior to the establishment of the Palestinian Authority and before the
peace process, Israel controlled in practice and by force almost every
aspect of Palestinian life. That included control over land, borders,
legislation, administration and services such as education, health, and
so on. At a certain point, Israel even appointed Israeli officers to act
in the position of Palestinian mayors. When the Oslo agreements were
signed between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, the
areas of Israeli control were scaled back. The peace agreements began a
process of territorial compromise, whereby the Palestinian Authority was
controlling "A Areas," while other parts of the territories remained
under Israeli control. Further negotiations were to continue this
transfer of territory from Israeli to Palestinian jurisdiction.

The Israeli Likud-led government headed by ideologue Ariel Sharon has
very different ideas about the future of the Palestinian territories, on
the other hand. Since the start of the Israeli occupation in 1967, it
has promoted what has become known as "functional division." Based on
the ideology that the Jewish people have historic rights to all of
Palestine, including the West Bank and Gaza Strip (which international
law and Palestinians consider areas under belligerent occupation), the
Likud opposes any territorial compromise. Now that it is in power, the
Likud has regained direct military control over all of the territories,
leaving for the Palestinian Authority the impossible function of daily
administration. The Sharon government's ultimate objective in this
regard is either to force Palestinians to renegotiate for other
arrangements that are based on functional compromise instead of
territorial compromise--or simply to impose this division by force,
which is what we are living through now.

As such, the Palestinian leadership has been left with one of two very
tough choices: to adapt to this situation forced on it by Israel, and
try to care for day-to-day Palestinian needs while sacrificing its
political and security role (which it is not able to maintain anyway
because of the imbalance of power), or to refuse these arrangements
altogether. That would leave Israel with the option of either taking on
both security and administrative responsibilities or leaving both
behind, i.e., allowing the situation to return to that in force before
September 29, 2000, which resulted from the implementation of the Oslo
agreements.

It is highly expected that the Palestinian people and their leadership's
continued engagement in rejecting and resisting Israel's occupation will
leave no opportunity for the Palestinian Authority to maintain its
administrative role and accept Israel's imposed functional division.
That would require either adapting to the occupation or making peace
with it, neither of which suit the inclinations of the Palestinian
leadership and the Palestinian people.

Indeed, running services under the occupation is a recipe for failure.
Eventually, the continuation of these attempts will lose the public's
respect and support and, ultimately mean political suicide. That is why
the Palestinian leadership now appears to be giving Arab and
international diplomacy a chance to bring to an end this madness and
extremism, before it places itself squarely in the camp of resistance
and rejection of occupation, rather than the camp of those ready to
adapt to military rule.

