Q: How would you describe the development of
Israeli-Palestinian strategic relations? What turning points have there
been?

A: The first turning point was the Oslo agreement of September 1993,
when the PLO [Palestine Liberation Organization] was co-opted as a
negotiating partner. This was a mistake, because the PLO represents the
Palestinian diaspora, and Arafat is incapable of giving up the right of
return. The Oslo process has made everyone, Israelis and Palestinians,
worse off, and has caused terrible suffering. Next came September 2000,
when Arafat in effect launched a war against Israel. This was followed
on February 6, 2001 by Sharon's overwhelming victory over Barak.
Finally, September 11, 2001 was a crucial turning point in reducing
Arafat's centrality; he has lost considerable support in the
international community, especially the US.

Q: The interception of the Karine A Palestinian gunship was
not a turning point?

A: No, it was a further indication that Arafat is bent on war
against Israel and that telling the truth is not one of his attributes.

Q: You recently wrote that for Israel now to refrain from
scoring a decisive victory over the Palestinian Authority-including
going into the Palestinian cities and disarming the PA-would be similar
to the mistake the first Bush administration made in 1991 when it
avoided conquering Baghdad and eliminating Iraqi leader Saddam Hussein.
But how do you deal with the downside: reoccupying three million angry
Palestinians, possible hostile reactions by Egypt, Jordan and others,
the American and UN reactions, the lack of consensus among the Israeli
public?

A: On balance, Israel will be better off if those hostile
Palestinians don't have weapons and Hamas can't launch operations. There
is no substantial danger from Egypt and others; the military balance of
recent years provides us with significant deterrence. Nor am I concerned
about the Israeli consensus; Sharon won by a 25 percent margin. Besides,
we are not talking about permanent reoccupation, but rather a temporary
move to disarm the PA. A decisive defeat will cause Arafat to lose support.

Q: Yet Sharon avoids doing this. Does he have such a mandate?

A: Sharon is creeping in that direction, accelerating since
September 11 with US and other international support, accustoming the
international community to what needs to be done. In truth, I don't
think that's a good way of doing it, but he's moving in that direction.
His mandate is the rejection by a very large majority of Israelis of the
underlying assumptions of the Oslo accord and of Arafat as a peace
partner, and support for more and more active measures. But calling
Arafat "irrelevant" was a mistake, a misuse of the word.

Q: How do you envisage the Israeli-Palestinian strategic
relationship after such a decisive Israeli victory? How will this
contribute to a peace process?

A: Such a move is a prerequisite for Israeli-Palestinian
negotiations that have a chance for positive results. As long as the
Palestinians believe in using violence to obtain objectives, no useful
negotiations can take place. We saw this with Egypt after 1973, when it
realized that violence as an option had spent itself.

Q: But Egypt was not decisively defeated in 1973, so how does
the analogy hold?

A: In the final analysis an Egyptian consensus emerged from the Yom
Kippur War that they could achieve nothing by force, even if they saw
themselves as victors. This is the model for Israeli-Palestinian
relations after an Israeli decisive victory: we must persuade the
Palestinians that the option of force won't work, that they cannot
attain their objectives this way.

Q: Who are the Palestinian candidates to talk to us on this
basis after our decisive victory?

A: If there is a chance, it's with local Palestinians, and over a
long period of time. I don't know if there's a cadre of Palestinians who
will negotiate under these conditions. I only know that this is a
necessary condition. I hear from our intelligence community that there
are such Palestinians around Arafat. But I acknowledge that recently
Palestinian extremists have gained more public support. In any event, I
don't believe in our manipulating the Palestinian public scene. Our
first objective is to save the lives of Israelis after some 250 losses.
If we disarm the Palestinians this will be a very significant step. If
it then turns out that nobody is prepared to talk to us, it's still a
net gain.

Q: Assuming some "insider" Palestinians are prepared to
negotiate a settlement after an Israeli decisive victory, what would
that settlement look like? What would you offer them?

A: This is not a question that should be asked of an Israeli
politician, who should not tell you now what he's going to offer in
negotiations that may or may not take place a few years from
now.

