After three weeks of combat, the giant statue of Saddam Hussein in
Baghdad's central square was smashed. This symbolic act ended the
despotic regime of the Iraqi dictator. The hour is ripe to offer
congratulations on what has been accomplished, and express hope and
expectations for the future.

There are six good reasons why congratulations for the American victory
in Iraq are in order.

First, I offer congratulations as an Israeli. The elimination of Saddam
Hussein and his repressive regime, together with the destruction of the
arsenal of weapons of mass destruction that Iraq was developing and
producing, have removed the extremely dangerous threat of physical
destruction that Saddam held over Israel.

Secondly, I offer congratulations for a military victory which has
brought a new reality to the Iraqi people. I share the joy of millions
who are tasting liberty for the first time.

Third, congratulations on a quick, crushing and unequivocal military
achievement. We witnessed a decisive victory that was achieved with
minimal losses to the coalition forces fighting in Iraq, and minimal
harm to innocent Iraqi civilians.

Fourth, my thanks for a victory that unmasked the hypocrisy of those
countries in Europe that, motivated by narrow and partisan interests,
sought energetically to prevent action against the dictator from Baghdad.

Fifth, I congratulate the Palestinian people and their leadership, who
had the wisdom to stand aside and avoid openly and declaratively
supporting Saddam Hussein and his extreme and fanatical policies. This
was a shrewd and calculated decision that will benefit the Palestinians.

And finally, I congratulate the president of the United States, George
W. Bush, who knew how to take responsibility and make a tough decision
under unusual political conditions. He rose to the challenge that placed
him at the head of the free world and in command of a struggle against
international terrorism and states, regimes and leaders of the "axis of
evil" that abet and support the terrorists.

Beyond the congratulations, I have four hopes and expectations for the
"day after" the military victory.

I hope that the Iraqi people and state will recover and recuperate and
once again stand on their own two feet, without suffering, pain and
serious injury. I hope the US will know how to establish an intelligent
and sensitive civil administration in Iraq to serve the weighty
needs--material, cultural and other--of a conquered people. And I hope
that the American leadership will take pains to transfer power to an
elected and peace-loving Iraqi government.

In this regard, the American leadership would do well to study the
lessons of the Israeli administration in the Palestinian territories,
learn to make the right decisions, and avoid the many unnecessary
mistakes of the Israeli leadership.

I hope the American success in Iraq does not end there. If we wish to
save this world from chaos; if we seek to live in a world free from
frenzied extremism--the US must stick with the job. As long as there is
no efficient international mechanism that is devoid of partisan or power
interests, Washington must serve as the arbiter and judge.

I hope the strategic and geopolitical reality that was revealed by the
military campaign in Iraq is now understood by those elements in our
region that have been supporting and encouraging religious and
nationalist terrorist organizations. These must now be closed down.

Finally, I hope that Washington holds to its commitment to the parties
involved in our own immediate arena of conflict, and acts quickly and
decisively to renew the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, with the
objective of bringing the two sides to a viable and fair agreement.
Israel and the Palestinians are ripe for it: after two years of violent,
painful and exhausting confrontation, they have come to understand the
pointlessness of trying to realize their political aspirations through
the use of force. Continuing the violent struggle and postponing
compromise will not advance a thing, and will only aggravate the pain
and suffering on both sides.

Both we Israelis and the Palestinians know almost down to the last
detail the contents of the only realistic agreement that is possible. We
are ready to meet the challenge. Yet both sides also have grasped that
they cannot reach the required compromise and cannot attain an agreement
without the active involvement of a third, neutral party whose authority
they recognize and accept.

