The Sharm al Sheikh summit has put the Palestinian-Israeli conflict at a
new crossroads. The summit created a situation in which a period of calm
and the undeclared ceasefire might be sustained and be developed into a
peace process replacing military confrontations with political
negotiations. But the lack of substance at the summit and the fragile
security situation are both problematic factors. Should the calm be
violated, it could undermine the new Palestinian leadership in a way
that might bring back the violence with even greater force.

There are several significant considerations that need to be taken
seriously by all parties concerned in order to consolidate and sustain
the current positive developments. First is a change in the attitude and
behavior of the international community. An effective third party role
must be developed, and that includes further changes in the American
attitude and behavior with more direct involvement in guiding,
encouraging and pressuring the parties to move ahead.

The criteria that should guide these efforts must be the roadmap and
aspects of international legality embodied in it. Without such a third
party role, the strong elements, especially in Israel but also in
Palestine, that are not happy with the current calm will continue to try
to sabotage it.

The second requirement is linking security progress and the calm with a
political process. It will be difficult for Palestinians to stand by and
watch calmly as the "peaceful" Israeli acquisition of Palestinian
territory continues apace with the expansion of illegal Jewish
settlements and the walls that are constructed inside Palestinian
territories.

The point here is that time can be a negative factor for the Palestinian
side, if it continues to be used by the Israeli occupying forces to
further alter the reality on the ground in a way that will prejudice the
future aspirations of the Palestinian people concerning an independent
state. Only by stopping the illegal creation of facts on the ground does
time become a neutral factor.

The third significant requirement to ensure the sustainability of the
Sharm al Sheikh understanding would be to undertake quick measures to
alleviate Palestinian poverty, reduce unemployment and allow for an
economic recovery so the Palestinian people will feel they have a real
stake in the new situation. It's worth reiterating the significant
statistical correlation between the increase in poverty and the increase
in extremism and radicalization in Palestinian society.

There have been previous occasions in which the two sides more or less
reached the point we are at now. But it wasn't sustained. This time,
learning from those previous lessons can make a difference. Israel can't
continue with its insistence that it must have a perfect security
situation while continuing its tactics of delaying any political
prospect as a way to ensure this. More security will come when political
achievements are made. And by the same token, Israel can't continue the
same tactic of insisting that any economic improvement will depend on
more progress on security issues.

Such approaches and tactics have backfired before and will backfire
again. And this is where the role of the third parties comes in, third
parties who should be guided by the roadmap where the first phase is
clear in its comprehensive approach that includes all these different
legitimate requirements. If taken comprehensively, the roadmap will
satisfy the two sides and consequently ensure the sustainability of the
current situation. Stalling over reaching specific agreements and
allowing the implementation of certain minor measures to consolidate the
achievements made so far, such as removing restrictions on Palestinian
movement, allowing workers to reach their places of employment, ending
the arrest campaigns, releasing prisoners etc., can strengthen the
already existing suspicion among many Palestinians that all Israel wants
is security, for which there is no intention of paying any price in
return.

