When the Israel Defense Forces won the 1967 War, there were two
important consequences for Palestinian history. One was the conquest of
the Palestinians' lands in the West Bank and Gaza Strip--without which
it is doubtful whether those lands would ever be returned to them--and
the beginning of a process of establishing a Palestinian state. The
other was the destruction of patterns of government, in the sense of the
system of reciprocal relations between the regime and the population.
This system of relations has existed since time immemorial in the Arab
countries; it explains the coexistence of despised regimes with the
populations that despise them.

This article seeks to discuss primarily the second consequence: the
reforms that Israel decided to institute in the ruling systems in the
territories it occupied. The conquest of the territories itself opened
the way to the establishment of a Palestinian state. The changes in the
patterns of governing the population of the territories and the
establishment of settlements, while not diverting this trend, have
turned the process into a cycle of blood and fire.

What are the essence and the significance of ruling practices in the
political culture of Arab society? They are a function of the absence of
a democratic tradition in which the people are sovereign and choose
their representatives for defined periods of time, and there is a
mechanism for replacing the government. Since such mechanisms do not
exist in Arab society, the modus vivendi between the ruler and the
population rests on several elements:


1. The regime is supported by the army, whose main task is loyalty to
and defense of that regime;

2. maximum dependency of the citizenry on the regime--usually by means
of a system of mukhtars and local authorities who represent the regime
in the eyes of the population, and vice versa;

3. a disparity between the dogmatic and the pragmatic, i.e., between
principles and actual behavior;

4. limitations on freedom of expression; in a society lacking in
democratic tradition, words easily turn into violence;

5. in view of the unique situation in the two territories of the West
Bank and Gaza Strip, Israel found in place in 1967 additional
restrictions that were embodied in a system of laws and directives that
had been imposed upon the residents.

Before Moshe Dayan, minister of defense in 1967, had time to learn what
was already in place in the territories--what in fact ensured the
equilibrium between rulers and the citizenry there--he decided to
dismantle the system of laws and directives that had existed prior to
1967. This involved elimination of the curfew in Gaza; erasing the Green
Line between Israel and the territories; canceling the ban on newspapers
(shortly after the occupation some 30 newspapers began to appear,
representing the various factions of the Palestine Liberation
Organization); removing government units from populated areas to prevent
friction; appointing to positions in the military government army
officers who neither knew Arab society nor spoke the language, in order
to ensure the success of the famous "non-interference policy"; and
additional instances of mistaken policymaking.

The attitude toward the future of the territories was also confused: it
sought, on the one hand, to maintain the West Bankers' link to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, while on the other, in the course of
superfluous elections that Dayan forced upon the West Bank in 1972 and
1976, to bring about the removal of mayors who supported Jordan; it
sought to encourage integration of the population with Israel while at
the same time opening the bridges on the Jordan River, thereby better
enabling the PLO to take control over the population and recruit it for
acts of violence against Israel; and it projected yet another idea, a
"functional arrangement" in which residents of the West Bank would vote
for the parliament in Amman while their lands were ruled by Israel. Add
to this Israel's reaction to the idea of federation between the two
banks of the Jordan, which King Hussein proposed in his speech of March
15, 1972. This was perhaps the best idea proposed until then, and Israel
rejected it.

In retrospect, what were Israel's alternatives after it occupied the
territories?

First, it could have followed in the footsteps of the regimes that
preceded 1967 and ruled the population in accordance with modes that
existed prior to the occupation, thereby generating coexistence between
the population and our rule along the lines of relationships that exist
between regime and citizenry in Arab countries. Secondly, it could have
accepted an arrangement with Jordan that would have left none of the
territories in our hands but would have provided peace along the 1967
borders. And third, it could have anticipated the potential of the PLO,
whose strength grew through a process of liberating itself from the
guardianship of the Arab countries, and tried to reach an agreement with
it.

What is the alternative today?

Throughout the history of modern Israel we have found ourselves in
control of Arab territories five times. By the by, for 18 years we
maintained a military government over the Israeli Arabs of the Galilee,
the Triangle and the Negev. This was the longest and most successful
rule of them all, not because we were once wiser, but rather because we
allowed their philosophy of survival to work. This happened during three
other periods as well: in Gaza after the 1956 Sinai Operation; at Faid
(Egypt) after the 1973 War; and in Lebanon, in the beginning, in 1982.
In 1967 we did not know how to benefit from the Arabs' philosophy of
survival. Meanwhile our world here has changed so much.

Today we cannot reverse this process. We must pursue the goal of a state
for the Palestinians--and separate them and us. In return it is in our
interest to relinquish the settlements and to be generous with regard to
the 22.5 percent of historic Palestine that remains for them.

