The Israeli reoccupation of the West Bank and Gaza is a "luxury"
reoccupation, wherein Israel has renewed military control but shuns
civilian control. As a consequence, the day to day suffering and
deprivation inflicted on the Palestinian population by the reoccupation
are extreme. Israel is ostensibly maintaining a functional division:
allowing Palestinian ministries and municipalities to run their
education systems and sanitation services, provide security, put people
back to work and administer welfare programs. Yet it simultaneously
imposes military restrictions that prevent movement of people and goods
and generally render a functional division impossible.

If reoccupation with functional divisions does not work due to security
reasons, then perhaps the humanitarian thing to do is renew Israeli
military government (which in the years leading up to its cancellation
under Oslo, Israel euphemistically termed "civil administration").
Because Israel would be responsible for all services, schools would be
open and some roadblocks removed; Palestinian freedom of movement could
be to some degree restored and the Palestinian economy would benefit.
Thus goes the reasoning of some Palestinians and Israelis who argue that
we currently have no alternative.

Some of the Palestinian advocates of this position genuinely hope that a
renewed military government would be a temporary measure, prior to a
return to a negotiated peace process. But a growing number now totally
despair of a two state solution. They simply prefer to bide their time
under Israeli rule while Israeli settlements spread throughout the West
Bank and the total Palestinian population comes to outnumber Israelis,
before they begin a campaign against Israeli "apartheid" and simply
demand "one man, one vote."

Some of the Israeli advocates of renewed military rule, backed by
neo-conservatives in the Pentagon, argue that Israel should welcome the
chance for an Israeli "MacArthur" to cultivate a genuinely democratic
Palestinian political culture under Israeli tutelage, just as the United
States did in occupied Japan and Germany after WWII, and soon may do in
Iraq.

In even contemplating the idea of a renewed military government, there
are a number of logistics issues to be noted. First, not all West Bank
cities are under occupation: would an Israeli military government not
include Jericho and Bethlehem, as well as the Gaza Strip cities--all
currently administered, at least to some extent, by the Palestinian
Authority? Then too, the restoration of military government is estimated
to cost over $200 million a month--money which Israel, currently in its
worst recession in 54 years, does not have.

At the political level, restoration of military government would
severely damage Israel's already tarnished image on the international
scene. The United Nations, the European Union, the moderate Arab
countries, all of which have exercised restraint in criticizing Israeli
anti-terrorism measures thus far, would see this new move, justifiably
or not, as a total departure from an anti-terrorism war, a return to
naked military conquest, and the deliberate dismantling of the "reform"
process they have instituted and encouraged. The US administration,
which is fully aware that most of the reforms remain stillborn, would
nevertheless probably concur with its "Quartet" partners' criticism in
response to Arab protests.

Perhaps most tellingly, at the Israeli-Palestinian bilateral level the
new/old Israeli military governors would quickly learn that you can't
turn back the clock. What worked relatively smoothly for some 20 years,
from the conquest of the West Bank in 1967 to the outbreak of the first
Intifada in 1987, will not work now. Two intifadas later, the
Palestinian right to self-determination has become an integral element
in the thinking of the international community, the Arab world, and
indeed of most Israelis. Thus Palestinians would continue to oppose
Israeli rule, with sweeping international support. And if most serious
observers are skeptical about the American capacity to turn Iraq into a
western democracy, yet muffle their criticism in deference to US
megapower status, they will not hesitate to bring to bear the entire
weight of the international community against a similar and outrageous
Israeli attempt, if indeed it is undertaken under cover of military
government, to cultivate a friendly Palestinian "democracy" in a
truncated rump state whose borders are drawn by Sharon and the settlers.

If the present situation of reoccupation is untenable, a renewed peace
process is impossible, and Israel has to choose between expanding
occupation into military government and something else--then it should
opt for something else: unilateral withdrawal, accompanied by the
dismantling of outlying settlements and the building (which has begun)
of security fences on or near the 1967 border with the West Bank. This
would be a far healthier strategy for renewing the peace process and
avoiding the "one man, one vote" trap.

