With the direct intervention of United States Secretary of State Colin
Powell in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the United States appears
finally to be moving toward a strategy. Yet there remain vestiges of
alternative thinking that reflect the dilemmas and divisions that
characterize the thinking of the administration of George W. Bush on the
Middle East.

The administration's initial approach to dealing with the region was to
deliberately avoid adopting a strategy: keep intervention relatively low
level by sending emissaries like Anthony Zinni without giving them a
strong mandate, and avoid dangerous initiatives.

The advantage of this approach was that it precluded any likelihood of a
spectacular diplomatic failure like that registered by Bill Clinton in
the final months of his presidency. It also faithfully reflected the
administration's essential lack of interest in the Israeli-Arab dispute.

The drawback was that it did not provide solutions to the
Israeli-Palestinian crisis, while the situation deteriorated. Washington
argued with declining credibility to its Arab friends and to Europe that
it was "taking the lead" in searching for a solution. Eventually the
administration appeared to recognize that the crisis had dangerous
ramifications for its Arab friends and rendered it increasingly
difficult for the US to concentrate on its primary objective of removing
Saddam Hussein from power.

The second option confronted by the Bush team, particularly after
September 11, 2001, was to support the anti-terrorism policies of
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon: operations like the current
Defensive Shield in the West Bank and possibly even the eventual removal
and replacement of Yasir Arafat.

The advantage of the pro-Sharon policy approach is that it is popular
with key sectors of the US electorate and is consistent in terms of
American treatment of terrorist leaders--in this case, Arafat. But this
option is anathema to Washington's European and Arab friends and
endangers massive American interests in the region. Nor is it likely to
succeed in ending the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; indeed, it poses the
twin dangers of regional instability and of local escalation. Things are
likely to be worse, not better, without Arafat.

Ostensibly Powell's current mission to the region means that the
administration has now abandoned this position--which, however
righteous, simply doesn't work. Powell's approach recognizes that the
Israeli-Palestinian violence revolves primarily around a territorial
dispute, and must be dealt with politically as well as militarily. But
there may be those in the hawkish wing of the administration who
dissent. Witness, for example, the delay in Powell's arrival for a week,
and the silence of Vice President Cheney and Secretary of Defense
Rumsfeld at a time when the president, Powell and National Security
Advisor Rice were loudly demanding that Sharon yield to American
pressure and cease the operation.

Here we arrive at the current American initiative, which appears to be
seeking an integrated regional strategy of political intervention.
Possible courses of action broached in recent days include convening a
"Madrid II" summit to discuss the Arab League-approved Saudi initiative,
working through the United Nations Security Council, readying an
international observer force to separate Israelis and Palestinians, and
galvanizing Arab pressure on Arafat to coincide with American pressure
on Sharon.

The danger of pursuing this option is that it is so ambitious. Failure
might redound negatively on US prestige in the region and on its effort
to coordinate Arab acquiescence with an attack on Iraq. And failure is a
real possibility, given that neither Sharon nor Arafat appears to be a
candidate for a realistic peace agreement. Hence Washington might
eventually find itself being called upon to lead the world in imposing
an extremely complex territorial settlement on two unwilling partners.

Unwilling, indeed. Sharon's endorsement of an international meeting of
some sort is conditioned on Arafat not being invited at all; he wants
the agenda to center on his non-starter proposal for an open-ended
interim agreement formalizing the territorial status quo. Arafat and
Sharon cannot agree on the sequence of commencing ceasefire and
withdrawal talks. New suicide bombings, with Arafat's implicit blessing,
are a near certainty. Thus discussion of a regional dimension is liable
to remain pie-in-the-sky unless Powell can begin clearing away the
destructive legacy of 18 months' fighting on the ground.

Meanwhile, the interaction between the Israeli-Palestinian conflict and
US designs on Iraq is, if anything, growing. One possible objective of
horrific Palestinian terrorist acts is precisely to keep the Arab-Israel
pot boiling and foil administration plans to recruit regional support
for toppling Saddam Hussein. Similarly, Iran sponsors Hizbollah's
escalation of fighting in Israel's north to keep the US preoccupied with
the Levant rather than the Gulf. Yet Sharon's failure to pursue a
realistic political course also renders it more difficult for Washington
to realize its objectives in the Gulf.

The attraction of the regional option is precisely the notion that, by
"Arabizing" the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the US can lead the region
in bypassing the intransigent local leaders, who have no constructive
ideas for peace. The very effort invested in such an enterprise might
win points for Washington and free its hand to deal with Iraq. And the
war weary Israeli and Palestinian populations are ripe for a compromise
deal.

Powell should go for it.

