We may differ among us over the repercussions or the morality of suicide
bombings. But what we do agree on unanimously is that when an individual
insists on deploying his or her own body, a power is released that might
be called a part of the "flesh against iron" strategy.

The problem with the strategy of "flesh against iron" in this case is
that it is based on actions of an individual and hence, remains
inaccessible to the public and the nation as a whole. Indeed, the nation
is forced to stand back and watch this solitary occurrence.

Observe the events of recent weeks in the world (which were not covered
by the Arabic press, including al Jazeera satellite channel), in
particular those in Bolivia where citizens of an entire nation bared
their chests and thus forced their government to relinquish power and
authority and flee the country. The same happened in Georgia, where
continuing demonstrations resulted in the overthrow of the government
and parliament, and obligated Edward Shevardnadze to resign in the wake
of charges that he rigged the elections.

These examples are offered here merely to demonstrate that nations
possess power, a power manifested in bodies tightly pressed together and
directed at a singular goal. After close examination, it appears that we
Palestinians are in dire need of this power. Some will say that there
are already organizations that call demonstrations to resist and
denounce the building of the Israeli wall and there are international
solidarity groups that coordinate with local Palestinian movements and
organize popular activities to confront the building of this racial
separation wall. This is all well and good, I would argue, but it does
not achieve the formula of "flesh against iron."

What has happened in Latin America and Georgia is what social scientists
and intellectuals call "people power." What is taken into account here
is persistence and numbers-- numbers are decisive in implementing goals,
rather than the particular action underway. Demonstrations that are
rallied to resist the construction of the wall must include thousands,
tens of thousands, or even hundreds of thousands persistently placing
their bodies as a barrier in the path of this wall. To achieve these
numbers, each Palestinian movement is responsible for organizing and
mobilizing people as a way of demonstrating their active presence on the
ground, rather than simply maintaining a popular base in society.

Some non-governmental organizations that do manage to organize
activities play an important role in maintaining contact with
international groups that stand in solidarity with the Palestinian
people. However, the structure of a non-governmental organization
differs from the composition of a social or national movement, which is
responsible for mobilizing and organizing the people. Some claim that,
as a result, political organizations and parties currently play a very
weak role in the public sphere--even being completely absent at times.
Still, this does not relieve these groups' responsibility for
confronting this wall, and in invigorating and supporting the public, in
particular those who have suffered with the wall's construction.

Political movements that maintain a popular base must take
responsibility and act; this means that they must fully bear the
consequences on their shoulders, rather than acting as guests at
activities hosted by non-governmental organizations. Some will argue
that a bloodthirsty Israeli army and Israeli settlers will easily
prevent public gatherings by using excessive force. But the point here
is that the goal of these public gatherings is to prevent the excessive
use of force, because Israelis cannot kill or attack thousands of people
at once. True, this strategy demands a high level of consciousness,
commitment, organization and support. It also requires the creation of
organized political frameworks.

But right now, international advocacy is at its optimum: the companies
hired by Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to polish his public image
have failed in their mission. That was clearly reflected in the latest
European poll. Too, the United Nations is becoming more direct in its
messages regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. There is already a
network of international support for the Palestinian cause, and this
will help in gearing a broad popular movement to prevent the building of
the wall. It is also worth noting that most European countries and the
United States of America do not support the building of this wall.

The "flesh against iron" formula should not only include the public and
its organizations, parties, and civil institutions; it must also include
the Palestinian National Authority itself. Many articles have been
written about the fall of the government of Mahmoud Abbas; others are
debating the future of the current administration. I, for one, believe
that if the current government follows the lead of its predecessor in
placing our destiny at the hands of "American and Israeli goodwill," and
finds no other path except "negotiations" and "peace processes," it will
be unable to shape a future out of the numerous sacrifices of its own
people.

What prevents governments from following the "path of peace," while
simultaneously organizing popular resistance? What explains the official
failure to lead public demonstrations against the building of this wall
or the spread of settlements?

The natural flow of life for all cross-sections of Palestinian society
is already impaired. What prevents us then from specifying certain days
or weeks for the public to gather around a settlement to prevent it from
spreading or to halt the confiscation of Palestinian land? What prevents
thousands from positioning themselves between the Israeli bulldozers and
targeted Palestinian homes to prevent Israel from demolishing homes in
Rafah, Jenin, or the Old City in Nablus? Yes, Israeli tanks and
bulldozers can kill a single person (as they did to American activist
Rachel Corrie), but Israel cannot kill thousands in one stroke.

What we need is goodwill, planning, organization and support. Israeli
tanks may kill tens or hundreds, but they cannot murder an entire
population. This is the value of pursuing the formula of "flesh against
iron."

