Q: What is the significance of the United Nations General
Assembly resolution to turn the issue of the fence over to the
International Court of Justice in The Hague?

A: It means that the IJC will have to deal with the legal
aspects of this question. I'm afraid that this discussion will also draw
the court into basic [and] complicated issues such as the status of the
West Bank (whether it is occupied territory or territory in dispute) and
the status of the Israeli settlements in the West Bank (whether lawful
or not). It would have been wiser to leave open these controversial
issues concerning the past and the present and instead to concentrate on
the search for a compromise solution of the political conflict, namely,
to look at the future and negotiate a new objective political and legal
settlement.

There are many legal questions in the history of the conflict which have
never been solved, such as the Arab claim that the British Mandate over
Palestine was illegal, that the 1947 partition resolution [181]
                   was illegal, that the 1967 war was not an act of
Israeli self defense, etc. In the same way I would suggest not to deal
with the questions mentioned above on which we can never reach
agreement, and moreover, to look for a compromise solution whereby the
answer to those questions is not necessary

Q: Is the fence issue suitable for the ICJ?

A: There have been many cases where the court had to answer the
question whether a request for an advisory opinion was suitable for the
court. But the court has very often agreed that it should give its
opinion even if the case is rather political or concerns security issues.

Q: So this is only an advisory opinion?

A: The court has two kinds of jurisdiction. The first is to
settle contentious matters submitted only by states. The second kind of
jurisdiction is the power to give an advisory opinion that is not
binding, upon the request of a major organ of the UN or one of its
specialized agencies. When the court is asked to give an advisory
opinion, it has discretion to give or not give an opinion. Except for
one case in 1923 it has always given an opinion.

It has to look at all the aspects that are relevant, and here the matter
is very political and disputed. The question that has been submitted by
the UN is: "What are the legal consequences arising from the
construction of the wall being built by Israel, the occupying power, in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including in and around East
Jerusalem, or described in the report of the secretary general,
considering the rules and principles of international law, including the
Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, and relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions?" If the court has to answer this question
it will have to deal also with the very controversial questions I
mentioned earlier, and the answer will not help us to reach a compromise.

Q: In this respect, could you comment on the legal aspects
of the suicide bombings the fence was built to prevent?

A: The legal aspects of the case are three. First, does Israel
have the right to build a fence? The answer is that because of suicide
bombings this is an act of self-defense to reduce the danger. The second
legal question concerns the power of Israel to confiscate the land on
which the fence is built. Here Israel is careful because it does not
confiscate the land but only requisitions it and pays rent, and this is
permitted under The Hague Rules of 1907. The third question concerns
freedom of movement, which has been established by the 1966
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. There is no doubt
the fence will impair the freedom of movement of the Palestinians. Here
Israel claims it is trying to find a proper balance between its right to
self-defense on the one hand, and the need to preserve freedom of
movement on the other. Therefore Israel has promised to build many gates
and crossing points in the fence in order to reduce the impairment of
the freedom of movement. Importantly, the Palestinians themselves
acknowledge Israel's right to self defense in their legal memorandum
which is attached to the report of the secretary general.

