Q: Former Prime Minister Ehud Barak now argues that Camp
David was a kind of success, since it was proven there at a relatively
early stage that Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat was not ready to reach
a genuine agreement, thereby enabling Israel to avoid a far worse
crisis. What's your opinion: success or failure?

A: Certainly not a success. The idea was to reach an end of
conflict, and it produced the Intifada. The only dimension of success
was as a learning experience for the Israeli public regarding the price
of peace. Prior to Camp David there were lots of illusions; Peres, for
example, argued that "with 80 percent [of the territory] we can do the
job." On the Right, they thought we could both rule and make peace. The
fact is that Israeli public opinion acquiesced in the price we have to
pay in partitioning Jerusalem and other areas.

Q: If you could repeat the exercise, with the benefit of two
years hindsight, what would you change?

A: I would set as a condition for going to Camp David that we
insist on a preliminary leadership summit. On the first day of Camp
David we should have stopped: here we have the teams that negotiated in
the Stockholm track; now the leaders have to discuss the gaps and the
overall framework, and only after that should we return to work in
teams. I told Barak and [then-US President Bill] Clinton that we should
reverse the mechanism of the meeting: the teams are trying to guess what
the leaders will agree to. I told Barak: why did you bring us here,
after all, I can meet with Abu Alaa back in Jerusalem. We have to put
everything on the table, and if there is no agreement in the leadership
summit, that means there's no agreement. Barak's stubborn refusal to
meet with Arafat was a big obstacle.

Q: Why didn't Barak want to meet with Arafat?

A: This is a classic example of personality as impediment. Barak
is incapable of crossing cultural lines. He has difficulty functioning
in a hostile cultural environment. All of his meetings with Arafat were
catastrophes. There were meetings prior to Camp David where Barak and
Arafat sat and said nothing; he wasn't capable of speaking at all.
Arafat and Clinton had very difficult meetings, but they were substantive.

Q: You didn't deal at all with the topic of Jerusalem prior
to the summit. Isn't this a case of poor preparation?

A: This was the main topic that was not discussed in advance. On
the first day of Camp David I stated "this is the Jerusalem conference,"
this will make or break the deal. The first positive turn of events was
when I presented my personal proposals on Jerusalem. This obliged Arafat
to be more flexible on the territorial issues.

Q: What did you learn about Arafat at Camp David?

A: He's the most impossible man you can imagine. He's actually not
a leader; rather, he's led by a series of myths, he's a kind of "surfer"
with a few fundamental beliefs regarding the Jewish state and Islam.
Once, after Camp David, I told Arafat: you invented a movement for
liberation and national struggle along the lines of the '60s, and now,
as we approach the moment of truth, you return to Islam. Rejection of
the Israeli claim to historic entitlement over the Land of Israel is
fundamentalism.

I don't know anyone who walked out of a meeting with Arafat having heard
a single sentence that had a beginning and an end. But this is a
strategy! He won't let you entrap him on anything.

Q: Was the Israeli right wing right about him? Should we have
made a more incisive assessment of the man prior to Camp David, based on
what we knew about him before the process began?

A: In retrospect, I agree that it was an historic mistake to bring
him here; it almost cost us the State of Israel. At various instances we
should have taken stock. But as a historian I would say that only now
have the conditions developed for delegitimizing Arafat. Prior to Camp
David there were no international conditions that would permit it. Here
the right wing was right in its gut feelings both about the partner and
about the deep currents of the conflict. But the right wing was not
right about a solution, because it has no solution.

Q: Other than Arafat, how did the Palestinians function at
Camp David?

A: The internal political component in both camps was an
impediment. At Camp David we saw the older, Tunis clique vs. the younger
and more pragmatic figures. I don't know what was more important to the
older set, reaching an agreement or stopping the younger set. The older
leaders were indifferent; at times there was a sense of a leadership
that won't take its fate into its own hands. Abu Maazen was like a
tourist in a safari park. In my view they bear the primary guilt for the
Palestinian national movement's obsession with seeking justice instead
of a solution, while their younger generation at Camp David signaled
that it would concede justice for the sake of a solution.

Apropos, King Hassan of Morocco told me in January '93 that he told Abu
Maazen that the time had come for the PLO [Palestine Liberation
Organization] to let the local leadership in the territories negotiate
with Israel. In other words, he had begun to recognize that perhaps the
PLO was not a partner.

