All eyes have been focused on United States Secretary of State Colin
Powell's meetings with Palestinian and Israeli leaders in an effort to
defuse a crisis that has the potential to menace regional stability.
After delaying for eight days, with a threat in between to boycott
Palestinian President Yasser Arafat, Colin Powell declared that the
meeting with Arafat had been "useful and constructive." The use of that
standard diplomatic euphemism for lack of real progress should not be
surprising, given the enormous built-in impediments to a viable
settlement of the conflict. Most basic of these is that the peacemaker
is also Israel's co-belligerent, chief diplomatic backer, bank roller,
and arms supplier.

It behooves all of us who wait anxiously for some sort of a
breakthrough, to keep three factors in mind as we ponder the
possibilities for a way out of a potentially-enlarged zero-sum
situation. First, there is the historic legacy of US peacemaking in the
area, second, the world-view of the self-designated sole conciliator,
honest broker, and catalyst for peace and third, the Israeli strategy,
its real objectives and perceptions of the end game.

The contacts and negotiations that will take place in the short-term
will undoubtedly focus on the micro issues. But breaking the logjam is
going to take much more than process, including denunciations,
proclamations and cosmetic measures. The political horizon must be
inextricably linked to the micro issues, with the later merely the
necessary steps towards the political road map that already exists and
is already anchored in a global consensus. The substance of that
consensus has existed for thirty-five years--land for peace, end of the
occupation, rollback of the colonial settlements, a Palestinian state
alongside (not within) Israel and a just solution for the refugee
problem in accordance with international law.

It is perhaps more important to "flesh out" the three factors that will
help us understand why that consensus has been thwarted than to "flesh
out" Arafat's latest denunciatory statement, as the US has stated it
will do.

First, there is a legacy of rejectionism on the part of the peacemaker
and/or Israel, going back to 1969. Israel has managed to reject a number
of United States proposals. The first casualty was the Rogers Plan
(1969), followed by Israel's frustration of Governor Scranton's mission
on behalf of Nixon (1970), the rejection of Egyptian President Sadat's
land for peace-mutual recognition proposal (1971), the rejection of
President Carter's call for a Geneva International conference in 1977,
the Reagan plan of 1982, the Shultz Plan of 1988, the Baker plan of
1989, and the successful thwarting of Bush Sr.'s attempt to link loan
guarantees to the issue of Jewish settlements in and around Jerusalem
(1990). Obviously, the younger Bush remains keenly aware of his father's
ordeal as he now ponders the outcome of his own unheeded request for
Sharon to withdraw "immediately" more than eleven days ago.

The Palestine Liberation Organization and the Arab states, on the other
hand, have associated themselves with the basic elements of the global
consensus expressed in countless documents, including the 1971 Sadat
offer, the Security Council resolution of 1976 calling for
implementation of Resolution 242 and a two-state solution, the 1980
Venice Declaration by the European countries recognizing Palestinian
self-determination, the 1981 Fahd Plan, the 1988 PLO recognition of
Israel, the 1998 European Union declaration, all the way up to the plan
of Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah adopted by the Arab League last month and
offering full recognition of Israel in exchange for ending the Israeli
occupation.

The second major barrier to a quick breakthrough is related to President
Bush's world view, a rather Hobbesian conception, which depicts a grim
landscape in need of a firm hand to "smoke out" terrorists and terminate
the scourge through the use of raw power. This muscular approach
contrasts with the traditional means of relying on policing mechanisms,
the judicial apparatus and monetary controls, among other diplomatic
means, for routing terrorism.

Thus a major obstacle to a successful American mission is the spurious
view that Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's war against a civilian
population is not a breech of the 1949 Geneva Convention--a war crime in
the Nuremberg sense of the term--but a war to dismantle the terrorist
infrastructure. This myopic logic has resonated with the
intellectually-impoverished mind of George W. Bush, who has hastened to
applaud Sharon's efforts perceived to reinforce Bush's own crusade.

The pragmatists among Bush's advisors, together with retired seasoned
politicians such as Lee Hamilton and Zbigniew Brzezinski, as well as the
editorial writers of the New York Times and the Washington Post, have
warned the president of the negative long-term strategic implications of
US complicity in Sharon's onslaught. Hence the Powell mission. Still,
opposing that advice is the dominant input of the right wing
neo-conservatives who have the upper hand in the foreign policy-national
security establishment--people like Donald Rumsfeld, Paul Wolfowitz,
Dick Cheney, Richard Perle.

The third impediment to a credible peace, even to a start of genuine
negotiations, is Sharon's own view of power and political realities.
Under the pretext of dismantling the terrorist infrastructure, he
launched an all-out onslaught designed to obliterate not only the
Palestine Authority, but also the economic and political infrastructure
of the Palestinians, including cultural, medical and humanitarian
institutions, indeed all the ingredients of a nation-state. His campaign
against terror has aimed at de-institutionalizing the Palestinians and
preempting a state-in-waiting, a strategy employed in Lebanon twenty
years ago.

As prime minister, Sharon has vigorously tried to browbeat the
Palestinians into submission and end their uprising against the
occupation for once and for all, forcing them either to accept a
fragmented entity consisting of four bantustans under Israel's control,
or to leave the country. Expulsion, which is euphemistically known as
"transfer" in Zionist literature, is now supported by nearly half of
Israel's population.

Thus, any attempts by Colin Powell to broker a settlement will come to
naught unless the occupation is dismantled in accordance with
international law and the global consensus. The negotiations would have
to link the favored micro issues and the innocuous Tenet, Mitchell
cliches to the real issues, including the status of Jerusalem, rights of
refugees, water and borders. That settlement is currently being
portrayed by neo-conservatives, the pro-Israel lobby and Israel's men
and women in Congress, led by presidential hopefuls Senators Kerry and
Leiberman, as a sell-out of Israel, a cardinal sin in American politics.
On the other side, there are the pragmatists who will no doubt push for
a Madrid-style conference with a quid pro quo on Iraq. The final outcome
will result from an ongoing test of domestic political will.

