This issue of "viability" has become inextricably linked to discussions
of Palestinian statehood because all of the various peace proposals
given the nod by Palestinians and Israelis incorporate the establishment
of two states, living side by side. Palestinians in particular have
emphasized the importance of assuring that the future state of Palestine
is viable, first because they feel the constant pressure of the unequal
power relations between themselves and Israel, and second because all
too often those parties who give lip service to the notion of
Palestinian statehood do their best to avoid describing the outlines of
this state. Usually what these parties have in mind is an entity that is
in fact missing some crucial features of independence and sovereignty.

Palestinian concerns about viability are rooted in the fact that their
quest is first and foremost for an end to Israel's illegal occupation of
the lands it captured by force in 1967 (the Gaza Strip and West Bank,
including East Jerusalem), rather than statehood in name alone. Thus,
the demand for statehood is intended to be the outcome of true
independence from Israel's yoke and the active exercising of Palestinian
self-determination as a people. Viability cannot be separated from these
goals. When Palestinians talk about the viability of their state, they
have in mind three aspects: economic viability, geographic contiguity
and control of their own borders. The absence of any of these three
features will make the Palestinian state vulnerable and dependant,
falling short of real self-determination, and in the end threatening its
long-term survival.

Many of the scenarios proposed by Israelis neglect or purposefully
undermine these features. One can only subscribe this tendency to the
desire by some to maintain control over the Palestinian destiny. The
repeated Israeli intention to maintain some Jewish illegal settlements
or settlement blocs is therefore a real threat to the Palestinian state,
and the viability of the peace process as a whole. Given that this
entire discussion takes place all the while Israel, which speaks about
Palestinian statehood, is doggedly pursuing the expansion of illegal
Jewish settlements in the occupied territories, Palestinians emphasize
viability as a means of reminding the world what this peace effort was
to be about: fulfilling the rights of a people to determine its own
path, as enshrined in the conventions of international law.

Much has been said about the link between economic and political
stability. Palestine must be free to trade with its neighbors on equal
terms, not only to be a poor guest economy for others' use. Control over
borders and geographic contiguity is connected to this goal in that
development of the state will require free exchange of products and
laborers between and through neighboring Arab countries, not least
because this state will form an integral part of the Arab world.

Before it is too late (because the bulldozers and cement mixers are at
work in the settlements every day) it is crucial to the peace process
that when those involved in the region talk about Palestinian statehood,
they also clarify what they intend for the fate of Palestinian
self-determination, sovereignty over land and borders and sovereignty
over the Palestinian people. Palestinians will not settle for less than
full-self-determination and sovereignty; only these will guarantee the
success and durability of a peace agreement.

