There is no simple solution for the Palestinian refugee problem--only a
creative one. One must first begin by questioning the nature of both the
Palestinian and the Israeli nation-states, the concept of state
sovereignty and its inherent violence, and the inclusion/exclusion that
the state exercises to determine who is a citizen.

In the spirit of Hannah Arendt, the state is seen as more of a problem
than a solution. Take, for example, a Bethlehem Fatah communique of
December 2003: "If we must choose between the Palestinian state and the
right of return, we will choose the latter." But is there a solution
that encompasses the right of return and a Palestinian state? Only the
framework of an extraterritorial nation state does, especially if one
third of the population of that state is refugees. We must rethink all
traditional political-legal categories, particularly in the Middle East.
In that process, the refugee figure becomes the frontier of humanity,
revealing the current crisis in the "trinity" of nation-state-territory.

The crisis of the modern nation state is that the exception is
everywhere becoming the rule. We increasingly live in a time where
populations? ontological status as legal subjects is suspended. The
failure of laws that govern citizenship marks a decisive turning point
in the life of the modern nation-state and a definitive emancipation
from the naive notions of "people" and "citizen."

In this context, the status of the "refugee" vis-a-vis the "citizen" is
more than problematic. Can we imagine a solution to the problem of
stateless and refugee Palestinians that does not rely on the
disciplinary apparatuses of the police and security forces? This issue
is not relegated to the Middle East; more and more refugees are excepted
from legal norms in many European countries. There, refugees maintain
the vulnerability of their status even after acquiring nationality. Any
criminal or other questionable activities puts them at risk for
denaturalization.

A solution that proposes head-counting the refugees in a given place and
offering them a few months to decide their fate is an utopist solution.
Individuals prefer to maintain flexible citizenship and multiple
passports, even if they choose to settle in one place.

According to a 2003 Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey Research
survey, some 60 percent of Palestinians willing to return to Israel want
to hold nationality to the Palestinian state. Only two percent want
Israeli nationality and one fourth of the entire sample prefer to hold
both nationalities. If the accumulation of foreign passports for some
globalized businesspeople is "a matter of convenience and confidence" in
uncertain political times, for almost all of the Palestinians who reside
abroad, it is a matter of survival. For those who have never possessed a
passport in their lifetime, having been forced to make do with a travel
document, the passport signifies and allows basic connectivity to family
and labor markets.

As such, while the classic model of return migration studies mainly
envisions a definitive return, the concept of return can be amplified to
include a form of being "in between." Transnational studies provide an
excellent conceptual framework for analyzing the experiences of
migrants, those who choose to live between worlds. This emerging new
form of refugeeness and migrant status is marked by active participation
in the cultural, social, economic and political lives of both the
country of origin and the host country, and provides new boundaries for
solving the Palestinian problem. This cannot be realized if the future
Palestinian state is conceived as a classic nation-state. Instead, why
not propose extra-territorialized Palestinian and Israeli nation states?

Currently, the political environments that frame Palestinian
transmigration are hostile to many transnational practices--or at least
do not facilitate them. Broadly, there appear to be two asynchronous
dynamics at work: one that accelerates the presence of transnational
actors in the territories, and another that is bound up with the
identity and political cohesion of the decision makers of the
Palestinian National Authority (PNA). For example, since the 1999
promulgation of a PNA law regulating non-governmental organizations, the
Palestinian Ministry of Interior has refused to allow Palestinian
Israelis to serve on the administrative board of any Palestinian
organization. This demarcation policy was also shared by some in the
private sector who wanted to reinforce the separation between the
interim Palestinian territories and Israel. The Palestinian
Telecommunications Company, PALTEL, tried for some time to price calls
between the Palestinian territories including East Jerusalem, and West
Jerusalem and the rest of Israel, as international calls--not taking
into account how this might impede connectivity within family networks
for one. The tension between these interests is quite normal. Refugees
develop a flexible notion of citizenship in order to accumulate capital
and power. Meanwhile however, the state seeks to preserve its inflexible
sovereignty.

While Palestinian scholars are accustomed to dealing with identity in
its strict legal sense, it is important to recognize that capitalism,
colonialism and culture also constrain and shape the subject, the
individual and the collective. The crystallization of Palestinian
identity is a relatively recent phenomenon. The same can be said for the
Arab and Israeli identities that emerged during the same period. Because
of the tenuousness of this process, the state in the Arab world became a
nationalizing state: after "making" Syria, Lebanon, and Jordan, those
states must subsequently make Syrians, Lebanese and Jordanians. The same
could be said of Israel and Israelis.

Thus we are far from a civic type of nationalism which relies on
voluntary commitment, a flexible criteria of membership in the national
collectivity, and a consensual legal process for resolving tensions.
Generally speaking, migrants are not encouraged (and sometimes hindered)
from declaring allegiance to both their countries of origin and their
host countries. This fact explains the manner in which some Palestinians
are assimilated to their host societies, while others retain a sense of
unstated double identity with less feeling of alienation.

The weakness of the center of gravity of the Palestinian diaspora,
alongside the relatively new Palestinian national identity, raises many
complex questions about Palestinian state formation and the ability of
the PNA to challenge the classic pattern of citizenship and
nation-states. One can imagine two forms that might allow a nation-state
to deal with people outside of its borders: a de-territorialized
nation-state or an extra-territorialized nation-state. Studies on
transnationalism may be a good framework for thinking about the former.
Some consider countries of origin as "de-territorialized nation-states"
in the sense that the state now stretches beyond its geographic
boundaries. By this logic, there is no longer a diaspora because
wherever its people go, their state goes with them. In this region,
however, it is very hard to imagine this kind of state being born.
Anthony Smith's argument that nation-states are "territorial by
definition" bears some weight.

The tension that currently exists between the practices of Palestinian
transmigrants/returnees/refugees and the policies of the PNA shows that
the prospect of an extra-territorialized nation-state is more feasible
than the former. In this case the state is territorialized, but it
distinguishes between citizenship and nationality. Accordingly, the
rights and the duties of those who live in Palestine would not be a
function of their nationality (i.e. whether they are Palestinian or
not.) At the same time, those who live abroad who are of Palestinian
origin could also enjoy rights and duties, even though not residing
permanently in Palestine. Such an arrangement would be possible only if
the PNA was able to enter into special agreements with countries that
host Palestinian refugees, in order to facilitate full dual citizenship.
This, particularly in light of outstanding questions regarding the
capacity for absorbing Palestinian refugees, could be an honorable
solution for those not willing to return but who would nevertheless like
to belong to a Palestinian nation and be involved in Palestinian public
affairs. It can be expected that many Palestinian refugees will return
only to obtain Palestinian nationality and then leave, or simultaneously
maintain two places of residency.

The model of two extraterritorial nation states--Israeli and
Palestinian--is a model that falls somewhere between the two-state
solution which due to power inequities is now leading to an apartheid
system, and the absolutely unpopular solution of a bi-national state. A
sort of "confederation" may be a more feasible solution: two
extraterritorial nation states, with Jerusalem as their capital,
contemporaneously forming, without territorial divisions, two different
states.

