Q: When Palestinians left Camp David, what was the deal on
the table?

A: In terms of procedures, the deal was that no blame would be
placed on any party by the American administration. United States
President Clinton agreed to this and so did the Israelis and
Palestinians. We agreed to continue the negotiations after Camp David in
order to reach a solution.

Then Clinton said he would merely praise [former Israeli Prime Minister
Ehud] Barak and the next day, Barak broke his commitment. He held a
press conference and used the line that he 'did not have a partner.'
President Clinton also blamed the Palestinian Authority and President
Arafat in what can be considered a breach of our understanding.

Politically, there was extensive conversation at Camp David on all the
core issues. These discussions were serious, but they did not reach
agreement because the Israeli side refused--after 12 days of
negotiations--to present anything written or tangible on any of the issues.

When Clinton's initiative arrived regarding land, refugees and borders,
it was not enough to entice the Authority and the Palestinian people to
agree to a solution and an historic deal of this magnitude. On the land,
the deal was to agree that 91 percent of 1967 lands would go to the
Palestinian Authority, in addition to a one percent land swap. The total
would have been 92 percent with eight security conditions: that there
must be an Israeli military presence in the Jordan Valley, a presence at
the borders, early warning stations, control over air space, that the
Palestinian state be demilitarized, three [Israeli] pathways to Jordan,
freedom for Israeli planes to fly over Palestinian airways and so on.
These conditions subtracted from Palestinian sovereignty over land not
exceeding 92 percent. It was not like what they later claimed--that a
magnificent offer was presented. It was only 92 percent.

But we are not talking about percentages as if we are in the market. We
are talking about how much the United States and Israel grew closer to
resolutions of international legitimacy, [United Nations Resolutions]
242 and 338 and the principles of land for peace, which are the
foundations of the peace process and Madrid.

The city of Jerusalem was to be divided into four categories--Al Haram,
the Old City, the surrounding neighborhoods and the villages around
Jerusalem. There were four security systems in Jerusalem and four types
of sovereignty. This was not a solution. Nothing essential could be
derived from this.

The refugee issue did not budge one inch at Camp David. There was only
talk about a "solution" to the refugee problem. When we reached the
conclusion that this was the offer before us, we rejected it. Evidence
that the offer was not sufficient is that later on, President Clinton
presented a more developed offer and the Israeli side at the Taba talks
came even closer to international resolutions.

Q: Was it your understanding that the talks were over and
that conflict was imminent?

A: No, the intifada arrived as a result of internal
Palestinian-Israeli circumstances. It did not occur because of planning
or ill intentions but due to Palestinian desperation after seven years
without arriving at a final agreement, the change of Israeli government
leaders every two or three months and prime ministers refusing to commit
to the agreement signed by his predecessor signed. This happened with
Peres after Rabin and Netanyahu after Peres and Barak after Netanyahu
and later with Sharon.

The intifada happened because of the loss of hope in the peace process.
We were not surprised and neither were the Israelis. In the last meeting
in Washington with Dennis Ross, two days before the Intifada erupted, I
told Shlomo Ben Ami and Gilad Sher that the situation would erupt if
Sharon visited the Haram [Jerusalem's holy mosque].

Q: What was your impression of the American role during and
after the talks?

A: President Bill Clinton was serious and conscientious and had
high hopes of ending the conflict between the two peoples. However, the
state department and White House team in charge of the file always
viewed the issue in terms of Israeli demands. They thought that every
time the Israelis conceded something, this should be enough for the
Palestinian side. It had nothing to do with the logic of justice or a
fair solution. The logic was that anything Israel was ready to
relinquish, you Palestinians should just take.

After that, Clinton put forward his ideas, which had some positive
aspects and some weak points. They were clearer than the Camp David
negotiations. But the Intifada had already begun. Mistakes were made by
the three parties in trying to save the situation. And now we have
arrived at this tragic state.

Q: As you know, Israel has been very successful in using Camp
David to demonstrate that Palestinians do not want peace. Why have the
negotiators been so reluctant to speak about the subject?

A: I personally am not reluctant. I have spoken about this publicly
to the media and in symposiums in the West Bank and Gaza. There are
negotiators who are reluctant to talk about the subject, but I am not.
Some negotiators accused me of trying to push the president towards the
agreement and that is true. It is my job to encourage the president to
reach a solution that would end the suffering of the Palestinians--but
not just any agreement, only one that the Palestinian leadership agrees
with.

