Until Camp David, Palestinians were in a relatively comfortable
negotiating position opposite Israel. Generally, the conflict was still
perceived as one of occupation and fulfilling the Palestinian people's
basic rights to self-determination and statehood. In return, Israel
would see fulfilled its basic rights to peace, security, integration and
prosperity. But that framework was seen as problematic by many
Israelis--including former Prime Minister Ehud Barak--who did not want
to concede on crucial issues such as the refugees, Jerusalem and a real
end to Israeli control over the occupied Palestinian territories and
their borders.

Barak, who made no secret of his criticisms of the Oslo agreements, had
always thought that Oslo's transitional philosophy where Israel would
gradually redeploy from all of the West Bank and Gaza Strip (barring
Jerusalem, military outposts and settlements) would weaken Israel's
bargaining position when it came time to negotiate final status issues.
Barak, like most Israelis, was not prepared to compromise on refugee
rights and Jerusalem and control over borders. He wanted to avoid
further scheduled troop redeployment in order to add negotiations over
territory to the agenda. That is why he unilaterally brought an end to
the implementation of Oslo's transitional phases and decided to force
everybody to Camp David where the gradual redeployment and final issues
would be handled in one deal. Territory was then to be used as a
bargaining chip for avoiding compromise on other issues.

As such, Barak had two objectives at Camp David-- either to reach a
final settlement ending the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and achieving
Israel's objectives of peace, security, integration and prosperity
without compromising on Jerusalem, the refugees or many of the
settlements, or to end the entire peace process and place the blame
squarely on the other side.

Barak pursued that goal by ensuring two things. First, he promoted the
impression that this was a take-it-or-leave-it deal and that it should
not be considered a step followed by others. He did not want this
process to remain alive after Camp David. The other thing Barak was keen
to do was to declare Palestinian culpability. Therefore, Barak--in true
Israeli fashion--asked United States President Bill Clinton to join him
in blaming Palestinians, using the argument that official US support was
the only way Barak would be reelected in the coming vote.

And so, while Camp David might have been viewed as an encouraging
attempt to open up final status talks and the beginning of real
discussion over the parties' positions, all productive results were
sabotaged. Another possibility could have been to declare that, while
participants were unable to conclude a final agreement, they would
continue implementing the interim agreements simultaneously with final
status negotiations. That would have kept the process alive and
prevented a vacuum. As we know, neither of those steps was taken.

Indeed, the only way to understand the unfolding of events is to believe
that Barak wanted Camp David to serve as his exit strategy from a peace
process that was leading inevitably closer to ending the occupation and
negotiations on the Palestinian refugee problem and Jerusalem's future.
Consistent with this was Barak's decision weeks later to encourage the
leader of his right-wing opposition, Ariel Sharon, to make his
provocative visit to Jerusalem's holiest Muslim shrine. Barak's army and
police then activated a military plan to brutally shut down civilian
protests against the visit, killing tens of Palestinian demonstrators
and decisively transforming relations between the two sides from
peaceful negotiations into bloody confrontation.

Still, Israel was unable to escape the parameters of the peace process.
Even when the international community offered assistance via the
committee led by US Senator George Mitchell, it did so in the form of a
stabilizing package for returning the parties to talks. At that time, it
was Prime Minister Sharon who undermined the initiative with the help of
Central Intelligence Agency Director George Tenet.

It was only after the events of the September 11, on one hand, and the
resumption of Palestinian suicide attacks on the other, that world
perception of the conflict shifted fundamentally. Hand in hand, Israel
and the American administration generated misconceptions over the nature
of this conflict, turning it from one of fulfilling rights and
implementing international law into one about violence and terrorism.
Hence, Barak's goal at Camp David was in fact completed by Sharon, Osama
Bin Ladin and some Palestinian Islamic activists. The finishing touch
was provided by President George W. Bush when he put the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict squarely in the arena of his "war on
terrorism."

The current situation is a clear setback for Israelis and Palestinians
who supported the peace process, and a victory for those who have always
sought to undermine a two-state solution. The only net outcome of this
victory will be to guarantee the continuity of the Israeli occupation
and undermine any chance of real peace. Currently, we seem to be assured
that this conflict will continue for another generation at least--unless
we see one of two changes. Only if the composition of the Israeli
government transforms and returns to power Israelis who believe in the
two state solution, or if the attitude of the international community
led by the United States amends towards a more responsible reproach will
we see an end to the grueling violence and bloodshed anytime
soon.

