My ears are full of war cries; there is no doubt that we sit on the edge
of a maelstrom of violence. But the "peace" that the world wishes upon
us is based on walls: a two-state proposal that is mistakenly being
called a "solution".

This solution will maintain the ethnic exclusivity of occupation and
propagate profound inequalities in land and resources, water, economy,
advancement and military between the two states. This solution will
reward foreign occupiers by offering them legal status and normal
relationships in the Middle East, while giving Palestinians bits and
pieces of our homeland, cantons that are separated from each other by
Jewish-only settlements and their safe roads.

This two-state solution advocates a demilitarized "Palestinian state"
with no direct borders with any of its Arab neighbors, but surrounded by
the Middle East's only nuclear power. A "transitional state," says the
American administration, that will be bestowed on one condition--that we
Palestinians behave and "elect" a "reformed" and "democratic"
authority--and then only after another three years of occupation.

And so, while Israel continues to welcome "refugees" from 2,000 years
ago, extolling its war criminals as national heroes and electing them as
prime minister, we Palestinians are expected to give up the right of
return, to abandon our political prisoners and to condemn our fighters.

Palestinians are described sometimes as the last colonized people, the
last frontier of genocide and ethnic cleansing--words we deign to speak
for fear of being labeled anti-Semitic. Always we must coach our own
horror in appreciation for Jewish suffering.

At home, I look out of the kitchen window to see that the Israeli flags
have moved forward, closer to our neighborhood, demarcating the new
boundaries of the Pisgat Ze'ev settlement. The Israelis claim that they
want peace after separation--they are establishing a wall between us for
security reasons. They want separation, a separation that will ensure
that Palestinians are denied access to the land of their immediate
fathers and forefathers, while Israelis continue to traverse their
secure bypass roads to settlements lying in the heart of the Palestinian
territories.

The vision of two states does not meet any minimal ambition of peace,
freedom and a dignified future for Palestinians. It jeopardizes our
basic human and national rights of sovereignty. Except for municipal
matters like collecting our own garbage, our nation will be totally
dependent on the state of Israel. In return, we will be expected to
collect Israel's garbage, wash Israel's dishes and offer cheap labor to
our oppressors.

However, I oppose the two-state solution not only because it is
impossible, but because it is immoral.

The Palestinians are a cosmopolitan nation. We are the descendants of
civilizations that have lived in this land since the Stone Age. We have
Canaanite, Semite, Aramaic, Arab, Turkish, African and European blood in
our veins. Here we were born, and here our forefathers have lived. A
common history, a common passion for our homeland and the same
unstaunched wound unite us.

We are not xenophobic or exclusive. We are Muslims, Christians,
indigenous Jews, Baha'is and Druze. Over the centuries our doors were
open to foreigners. The Armenians fleeing genocide found shelter among
Palestinians, Africans came as pilgrims and were entranced by the magic
of Jerusalem. Early Jewish immigrants fleeing persecution were accepted
within the Palestinian community, worked with Palestinians, lived in
their towns, and intermarried with them. According to the Palestinian
National Charter, the document that lays out our national principles,
Jews who immigrated to Palestine before the 1948 Nakba are Palestinians.

Our rejection of the Zionist project is not based on hatred, but on the
rejection of foreign occupation, the theft of our homeland and
resources, and the crimes that have been committed in realizing the
dream of an exclusively Jewish state.

I acknowledge that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is very complex. The
emergence of two generations of Israelis born in the land occupied by
their forefathers makes things infinitely more confused. It means that
this conflict will not be solved until we recognize the presence and the
humanity of the other, rectify the wounds of the past, acknowledge the
wrong that has been done to Palestinians and then undo those wrongs as
best we can.

My hope lies in a multi-national, multi-ethnic democratic state of
historic Palestine for all its citizens. I do not care about the safety
of Israelis any less than I care for the safety of my own people, nor am
I suggesting that we jump into this process without preparation. We must
start by demanding that Israelis remove their armed children from our
doorsteps, with a United Nations force as a common buffer zone. We
Palestinians everywhere need to heal and work with each other to elect
new democratic representatives instead of the same tired faces. And
then, as two equal nations, we need to set out upon the business of
making right the wrongs. It is time for something new.

"You are asking us to commit mass suicide," one Israeli told me. No, I
am calling for Israelis' moral and ethical liberation from the sin of
occupation, for their freedom from pathological fear and the neurosis of
security, and the restoration of their human rights as equal citizens in
a free country.

This is not my fantasy--it is my enduring hope. The making right of
colonization has been achieved in recent history. South Africa is a
living example of the triumph of hope and reconciliation over oppression
and prejudice.

When Palestinians live together as equals with the people of Israel,
when not only Israeli security matters, but Palestinian security as
well, and when both of us take the same bus to work, stand at the
ministry of interior together, endure the same procedures at the airport
and have equal wages for the same jobs, then the last shall be first in
keeping the peace.

