It is difficult to find any neighboring polities that have the level of
interdependence of Palestine and Israel. Whenever there are elections in
Israel, issues related to Palestinians dominate, and Israelis divide
over the best way to handle the Palestinian problem or attitudes over a
specific agreement and so on. Similarly, while Palestinians are
unfortunately less privileged with the opportunity for elections, when
polls did take place the Oslo agreement with Israel was the hottest and
most divisive topic.

For that reason, it is really irrelevant to debate the value of
"interfering" or "not interfering" in each other's elections; we are
each integrated in the destiny of the other. Because Israel is the
stronger party in this conflict, the results of its elections are a
significant event for both Israelis and Palestinians. It should be
expected that all those who hold stock in the course of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict will also be deeply invested in the results
of the Israeli elections.

This particular Israeli election, however, is attracting an
extraordinary amount of attention and interest--from Palestinians, other
neighboring countries and internationally--simply because this election
puts all of us at a significant crossroads. The Israeli people may
indeed choose to extend the leadership of the current, right-wing
extreme element in Israeli politics headed by Ariel Sharon, which will
mean an inevitable continuity of the ongoing bloody confrontations
between the two sides. Put simply, this right-wing government is the
very same camp that originally opposed the peace process because this
camp holds dear an ideology incompatible with the notions on which the
peace process was established: an exchange of land for peace. Instead,
this right wing is completely invested in the historical and religious
rights for the Jewish people over all of the land that international law
considers under belligerent military illegal occupation.

On the other hand, the Israeli public may do an about-face and turn the
course of the bloodshed by electing a political leadership belonging to
the peace camp and allowing the resumption of a relationship of peace
negotiations. This relationship will reach one of two conclusions:
either such a government will be able to reach a final and comprehensive
agreement and end the conflict, or at the very least it will substitute
these gruesome and costly confrontations with a relationship of talking
and cooperation in terms of security and the economy, while continuing
confidence-building measures and gradual implementation of the interim
arrangements. That last option may not be as positive as the conclusion
of a final comprehensive agreement, but it would be better by far for
both sides than continuing the current disastrous situation.

To put this even more clearly, Israelis in this election face a choice.
Do they want to concentrate on occupation or on peace? The two together
are incompatible. As long as there is occupation and settlement
expansion, there will be alongside it violent confrontation, because the
occupation itself is violent in order to maintain its control and those
under its thumb will spare no means to rid themselves of that insidious
control.

To conclude, there is no doubt that Palestinians must try to contribute
positively to encouraging Israelis to head in the right direction. The
way to do that is to reiterate the Palestinian commitment to peace based
on international law, which stipulates the need to end entirely the
occupation of the territories of 1967 in accordance with United Nations
Resolution 242 and guarantee a comprehensive and lasting peace including
a solution to the refugee problem based on international law.

