Renewing the Syrian-Israeli negotiations track can be a positive
development for the Middle East peace process in general; including for
the Palestinian-Israeli track. From experience in the different stages
of the peace process, it has been clearly shown that moving ahead on one
track and leaving the other behind always creates instability and
motives for obstruction. While there are indeed different components of
the conflict, the various tracks are closely inter-related. One must
recognize the two common denominators in all tracks: Israel is a party
to both and the Palestinian problem is the root of the entire conflict.

The standard questions raised about the possible effects on the
Palestinian track which consistently follow any news of "renewing"
efforts on the Syrian track, are irrelevant this time around. The reason
is very simple and straight forward: there are no Israeli-Palestinian
political negotiations to be affected, negatively or otherwise.
Moreover, Moreover, there is no hope of reanimating one as long as
Israeli Prime Minister Minister Ariel Sharon and his extremist coalition
are still in power.

Having said that, it can be added that the Syrian track lacks both the
dynamics and the urgency for moving forward. With the situation static,
the different parties are able to live with the status quo with little
cost to be paid by them if the conflict is not solved. Syria is not
under occupation and Israel is not under fire. The only aspect that
"spices things up" is Lebanon but even Hezbollah is gradually
concentrating on exclusively Lebanese priorities.

Another important reason why it is difficult to be optimistic is that
all this appears to be happening for purely tactical reasons. It is just
maneuver. The Israeli government is trying to compensate for its failure
in making any progress on the Palestinian track. At an ever-quickening
pace, the current Israeli administration is solidifying its reputation
as an anti-peace ruling coalition.

The Syrians, on the other hand, are convinced that making peace with
this Israeli government is a hopeless case. They are however using the
appearance of being a partner in the peace process as one of the main
mechanisms to diffuse current American pressure even though this
pressure emanates from different areas.

Since international legality is the common aspect in all components of
the Middle East conflict, a multiple negotiation process that is about
making peace by adhering to international legitimacy and implementing
relevant UN Security Council resolutions is the only way for a
comprehensive and lasting peace. The recipe for this is the Saudi--and
later Arab--initiative which offers Israel lasting, collective, and
comprehensive peace, in return for a complete withdrawal. For this to
happen there needs to be a change in the composition of the Israeli
government and a strong role for representatives of the international
community (such as the Quartet). Right now, both of these are absent.

