Water issues can impact the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in various
ways. On the one hand the issue of allocation and control of water
resources can be a source of direct conflict and dispute. On the other
hand, due to the shared nature of the resource, which leads to the need
for joint management and protection of water resources from pollution,
there is a strong need for cooperation. Water as the basis of all life
is described as a humanitarian issue, encouraging compassion and
understanding; at the same time water is increasingly described as a
human right where misallocation becomes a breach of legal norms.

Water resources in the Israeli-Palestinian context are by definition
trans-boundary issues. Israelis and Palestinians share both groundwater
and surface water resources. The two major groundwater sources in the
region are the mountain aquifer and the Coastal Aquifer. The Mountain
Aquifer is shared by Israel and the West Bank and the Coastal Aquifer
shared by Israel and Gaza. The River Jordan is the main surface water
shared by Israel and the West Bank. In the case of the shared Mountain
Aquifer, Israel utilizes at least 80% of the aquifer's water resources
and in the case of the Jordan no access is given for direct Palestinian
use.

In the Israeli-Palestinian conflict water allocation remains a disputed
issue but, surprisingly to most people, not an impediment to progress in
peace talks. This was witnessed in the Camp David negotiations and the
Taba talks of the last days of the Barak government, where refugees,
settlements and borders were the explosive issues with water no longer
appearing in the headlines. Similarly in the recent Geneva accord
negotiated by Yossi Beilin and Yasser Abd Rabbo, the water issue is left
for later negotiation. Off the record, both Israeli and Palestinian
water officials state that the final water allocation arrangements are
more or less worked out but that they will not be declared and
implemented until a peace agreement is signed.

Leaving water arrangements to final status comes at a heavy price to
those residents that currently lack sufficient water for domestic
purposes. There are some 200 Palestinian villages that are not connected
to the water network. Particularly in days of closure they cannot even
truck in the water needed for their communities. During drought periods
Palestinian residents in West Bank cities cannot be certain of water
flowing in their taps in the summer months, often resulting in political
pressure placed on the Israeli side to increase water supply.

For the Palestinians, the Oslo process (the Israeli-Palestinian
bilateral track) and in particular the interim agreement of 1995 (Oslo
II) brought some change for the better. The process led to Israeli
recognition of "Palestinian water rights," acknowledged the need for
additional water to be provided to the Palestinians, and created a Joint
Water Committee to coordinate water related activities. Under the Oslo
process significant American and European funding has gone into the
Palestinian water sector to provide more water to Palestinian cities and
towns. The fact that water negotiations remain incomplete, however, has
left Palestinians unsatisfied with the quantity of Israeli water
allocations to them and the virtual veto power that Israel enjoys in the
Joint Water Committee framework.

Nevertheless progress has been sufficient to remove the water issue from
the "high politics" shelf. During this latest intifada, when all other
negotiation issues came to a complete halt, both sides were able to meet
and agree to continue to cooperate on water issues. The only agreements
signed by Israel and the Palestinian Authority since the outbreak of the
intifada have both involved water issues: an agreement not to damage
each other's water infrastructure and a recent agreement on standards
for sewage treatment.

The water meetings held and the agreements signed have unfortunately
been kept out of the public eye. On the contrary, the respective
ministers responsible for water issues have issued public charges
against each other--the Palestinian charging denial of drinking water by
Israel and the Israeli charging sewage terrorism by the Palestinian
side. A recent study undertaken by Friends of the Earth Middle East
(FoEME) concerning pollution sources of the Mountain Aquifer revealed
that both Israelis and Palestinians pollute the aquifer, with 75% of the
pollution coming from Palestinian sources and 25% from Israeli sources.
Above the Mountain Aquifer, which is the most important source of
drinking water for both Israelis and Palestinians, the sewage of some
two million people, predominantly Palestinian but in no small measure
Israeli, remains either untreated or insufficiently treated.

It all could and should be different. Through a US and EU government
supported grant FoEME created 11 partnering communities in Israel,
Jordan and Palestine. Water issues were identified by FoEME as the focus
of the cross border partnership, under the project title "Good water
makes good neighbors". The project has witnessed hundreds of young
people from schools and community groups becoming water trustees in
their respective communities. The water trustees carry out water
awareness programs within their community and at the cross border level
conduct dialogue and where possible exchange visits with their
neighboring water trustees.

The willingness to cooperate on water issues at the community level
exists because water is understood by all our peoples as essential to
life. Due to the trans-boundary nature of the water resource and
regional water scarcity it is well understood by the general population
that when it comes to water we are dependent on each other to protect
the resource and have a responsibility to share it.

There is no justification for either side to delay final arrangements on
water issues that are "99% worked out". The failure of both governments
to show greater public leadership on water issues results in unnecessary
hardship of water scarcity to Palestinians and continued pollution of
scarce shared Israeli/Palestinian water resources. The experience of
FoEME demonstrates that because of the interdependent nature of the
resource, water can be the issue that helps rebuild trust between our
peoples.

