Q: How do we know when the two state solution is no longer
viable?

A: The end of the two state solution will be indicated by a
situation whereby the settlements, in view of the political and
demographic force they represent, obstruct or undermine the possibility
of drawing a border between the state of Israel and the designated state
of Palestine. In other words, a border becomes politically non-feasible
for the Israeli leadership and possibly for the Palestinian leadership
as well.

We are talking here about a process. It is enough for the opposition to
a two state solution on both sides to maintain a level of violence that
prevents political agreement, to accelerate the process leading to a one
state "solution".

When the political costs of drawing a border exceed the gains, then a
border can only be imposed from outside.

Q: Are you suggesting that the international community
would intervene to impose a border in order to maintain a two state
solution?

A: The question is not whether they will intervene, but whether
their intervention will be vigorous enough to make a difference and
prevent the disintegration of the two state solution. For example, both
the settlers and the Palestinian extremists know the president of the
United States has to worry about elections every two years, economic
problems and other diversions. Their strategy is to create violence in
order to delay significant political and diplomatic processes,
particularly near moments of consummation, to prevent a resolution.

Q: How close are we to a point of no return?

A: Very. If Palestinian patriots and the Palestinian leadership
arrive at the conclusion that a one state solution is preferable because
they will end up with greater Palestine with a Jewish minority rather
than greater Israel with a Palestinian minority as the settlers want,
then they will actually seek this result.

Q: What will be the effect on the two societies?

A: The result will be to convince larger numbers of Israelis that
the only way to survive as a state is through massive violence against
the Palestinian population. In other words, if the course of events
leading to a one state solution is not prevented, we are likely to move
in the direction of civil war where each side seeks to exterminate and
push out the other. This will prevent either community from realizing
its capacity for a polity.

So one ongoing incentive for a two state solution should be the ability
of the Palestinian leadership to project a war that both sides will lose
and that does not result in a viable one state solution, and the ability
of the Israeli leadership to project the dangers of such a war; the
ability of leadership on both sides to show the futility of abandoning
the two state solution. This capacity to understand that we can destroy
each other is more important than, say, the leadership of President Bush.

Every leader in this region has an automatic mandate from his/her
constituency to take measures in defense of the community. No leader can
claim to have a mandate to take measures that cause self-destruction. Do
our leaders know the line that distinguishes between the two conditions?
I'm afraid they need urgent help to redraw this line.

Q: In this context, how do you assess Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon's commitment to a two state solution?

A: Sharon has resolved that if there is an unambiguous historic
opportunity to end the conflict, he will do his share. But for this
historic opportunity to be compelling to him, it has to be extremely
dangerous for Israel not to act in this way.

Sharon's definition of historic opportunity is very maximalist, due to a
lack of trust. The question is whether the Palestinians, the Arabs and
the US can seduce Sharon into reducing his expectations. For example,
right now Syria is out of the game. But if it suddenly offers to
moderate its position rather than support the extremists, this will
constitute an incentive for the Sharon government and affect its ability
to make painful compromises domestically.

Q:  How will the demise of a two state solution affect the
Jewish Diaspora worldwide?

A: The end of the Zionist dream can take several forms, including
the loss of a Jewish majority, loss of democracy, and a radical
militarization of Israeli society. It will create a split within the
Jewish people worldwide along fault lines that we can already see. On
the one hand a very small minority, 15 to 25 percent, of people who know
only ethnic solidarity and have no dreams other than survival and
revenge. This is the group that supports the settlers ideologically. And
on the other the majority, who will disengage.

Disengagement would be a tremendous blow to the idea of Jewish
collectivity; if the only expression of that idea is a form of apartheid
state, then Jewish youth worldwide will run away from Jewish identity.
That would be an ironic and tragic outcome of the Zionist movement.
Instead of becoming a spiritual center for the entire Jewish people,
Israel would become the epicenter for the disintegration of the
foundations of Jewish collectivity and solidarity in our time.

