With the increasing scarcity of water, both as a result of natural
causes and population growth, the issue of water is becoming a more and
more significant component of the Arab-Israel conflict in general, and
the ongoing Palestinian-Israeli struggle in particular. Indeed, in the
peace process that was initiated in the beginning of the 1990s, water
was recognized as one of the most significant final status issues
together with Jerusalem, borders, settlements, and security.

The water issue has more than one dimension. It is a question of
sovereignty affecting territorial and border issues. One reason behind
the Israeli drive to modify borders away from 1967 lines is water. It is
also at the core of the settlement issue simply because one of the many
considerations behind the location and building of settlements is water:
Israel has been concentrating its settlement expansion policy over the
water reservoirs in occupied Palestinian territories.

Moreover, Israeli practices concerning the issue of water in occupied
territory have been in violation of international law in more than one
way: on the one hand, Israel is illegally stealing water that
international law prevents occupiers from using for the purposes of its
own citizens, and on the other, Israel is restricting the indigenous
population, the Palestinians, from being able to use and enjoy the water
that legally belongs to them.

Israeli water policy in the occupied territories is also an illustration
of the racial discrimination inherent in the occupation. Studies show
that Israeli settlers, with no restrictions on their usage of water, on
a per capita basis use 20 times more water than the average Palestinian
individual.

So there are two levels to this issue. One has to do with the current
situation, which needs to be dealt with in accordance with international
law. International law clearly allows the occupied people the right to
enjoy whatever scarce water resources they have under territories
legally considered as occupied and also prevents the occupiers from
using them. The second is the way this issue should be dealt with in
final negotiations. In this regard, the Palestinians will insist on
their full rights rather than negotiate over the use of water from these
resources, i.e. the complete control over and consequent use of water
aquifers under Palestinian territories.

There is, of course, some complexity arising where reservoirs lie under
the borders, meaning the two states will share the same reservoirs. But
even in such a situation international law has specific regulations to
be followed.

A recent example of the problems generated by the water issue appeared
when Israel and Jordan wanted to negotiate the implementation of a study
sponsored by the World Bank on a potential Red-Dead or Med-Dead canal,
to bring water to the Dead Sea to offset the decline in water levels
there and to use such a canal to generate electricity along the way. The
World Bank considered Palestine as a legal partner, not only for the
project itself but for the study. The project has been shelved for now
because of Israel's refusal to acknowledge Palestinian rights in this
regard.

Similar to all other issues in this conflict, the water issue can be
solved only when Israel is willing to recognize the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people according to the relevant stipulations of
international law. The refusal to adhere to international legality on
the water issue is an indicator of a continuing Israeli unwillingness to
replace the current conflict with normal and peaceful relations between
the two peoples.

