Q: When you led negotiations with Syria under the Netanyahu
government, what were your calculations regarding the effect on the
Palestinian track?

A: The driving consideration was that by activating the Syrian
track, we were also improving Israel's maneuvering space and
capabilities vis-a-vis the Palestinians. If you recall, the interim
negotiations with the Palestinians that culminated in the Wye River
Conference took place in 1998. It is no coincidence therefore that in
the summer of 1998, during the weeks and months preceding Wye,
Syrian-Israeli indirect negotiations reached their peak. The Syrians
were always surprised at the fact that each successive [Israeli] prime
minister appeared to give priority or preference to movement on the
Syrian track, a pattern that was true for Rabin, Peres, Netanyahu and
Barak. But the Syrians repeatedly found themselves stalled at the end of
the process, with the Israelis reengaging the Palestinians.

In the summer of 1998 the Syrians felt rightly that Israel was on the
verge of concluding what was to become in October the Wye agreement.
Because they had to recapture primacy they understood they had to make a
deal attractive to Israel. President Hafez Asad acted very much as "an
old man in a hurry", for two reasons. He realized he was nearing the end
of his role. But he also realized that an agreement with the
Palestinians was in the making. It was very much Asad who showed greater
flexibility and a willingness to conclude the deal quickly.

Q: How did this affect the Palestinians?

A: As near as I can tell they were not aware of the negotiations
[with Syria] at the time. There were fragments of gossip, but they were
not aware of the intensive shuttle diplomacy that took place in August
and September. But one cannot rule out the possibility that the
Americans, who knew about the talks with Syria, tipped them off to nudge
them towards an agreement.

Q: What has changed since then?

A: In the previous decade two considerations that affected Israeli
thinking--beyond the issues on their own merits--were the Lebanese
situation, which at the time was festering and costing us, and the
negotiations with the Palestinians. Both had the effect of increasing
Israeli interest in moving first on the Syrian front, so as to increase
our leverage vis-a-vis the Palestinians as well as to resolve the
Lebanese imbroglio by negotiating with Syria.

These calculations are no longer operative, due to three developments.
First, Israel withdrew unilaterally from Lebanon in 2000, and with all
the ensuing consequences regarding the Palestinians, this had the effect
of lessening Israel's interest in dealing with Syria. Secondly, the
demise of Hafez Asad and the emergence of his son Bashar have created a
discontinuity and a high degree of uncertainty as to whom we are dealing
with. And thirdly, the post-9/11 post-Iraq Middle East is a different
region in ways that project upon the Syrian issue in Israeli or for that
matter American eyes. The net effect of these developments is that there
is not as high an Israeli interest in moving on the Syrian track now as
there was under previous circumstances.

Q: Would you yourself recommend negotiating now with Syria?

A: Israel should certainly consider pursuing the Syrian option,
taking into account all that has changed and the new opportunities that
present themselves. This time Israel's approach would be less motivated
by the effect on the Palestinian track as connected to regional factors.
These include American objectives and Syrian weakness, but also the
shifting conditions in the Middle East as manifested by many of the
consequences of the American action in Iraq, e.g., what has happened in
Libya and Syria.

I personally believe that it would not consume too much of our energies
to engage the Syrians with a view to exploring these new vistas. There
is no rush, no urgency, Bashar Asad could very well be a young man in no
hurry and neither are we, but the changed circumstances could suggest
the possibility of a new deal with the Syrians that would better suit
the present and changing Middle East. Just as Syria has shown greater
flexibility toward Turkey, and considering that it may have new
objectives in its relations with Europe and the US, I would not be
surprised if, when it comes to the contours of a territorial deal
between us and Syria, it showed greater flexibility than in the past.

Q: So you believe the Syrians are serious?

A: I share the assessment of Israeli intelligence that Bashar
Asad's desire to engage Israel is genuine. This clearly indicates that
Bashar may be feeling pressure as well as reconsidering his
circumstances and showing an interest in changing his regional and
international conditions. This could be a signal that there may be
greater flexibility in Syria's present position which, if properly
leveraged by the US and Israel through the use of incentives and
disincentives, could result in a future deal some time down the road.
The pacing of the process could be decided taking into account the
Palestinian track so as to make sure that each is being pursued to the
limit the traffic can bear without one interfering with the other or
adversely affecting it.

Q: Will Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon negotiate with
Syria in the near future?

A: Evidently Sharon has shown little interest in pursuing that
option. Of course this could always be a tactical display of reluctance,
but it could also be genuine since his hands are full with his present
initiative on the Palestinian issue.

