Much has been written about the apartheid wall and the reason for its
existence. Israel maintains that it is a temporary structure erected for
the purposes of security. Palestinians see it as a simple land grab,
designed for the express purpose of ensuring that any future Palestinian
"state" will be no more than a collection of isolated bantustans, a
state on paper only.

Control over water resources may provide a clue as to the purpose of
this wall. Control over water resources has long been one of the primary
objectives of Israeli settlement policy, even dating back to before the
existence of Israel. From the 1930s on, the Zionist movement focused its
settlement activities on fertile land. The policy has been consistent
ever since, from the Jordan Valley to the coastal aquifers in the west
and south. It is no accident that the Gaza settlements lie on top of the
Gaza Aquifer in the Strip.

Since the overexploitation of the waters of the Jordan River and the
Coastal Aquifer, the aquifers of the West Bank, particularly the Western
Aquifer, became the center of focus. Consequently, the Israeli
occupation authorities prohibited Palestinians from digging wells in
those areas, and Israeli officials publicly stressed the importance to
Israel of maintaining control over the mountainous regions of the West
Bank that straddle the aquifer. In 1991, for example, then Israeli
Minister of Agriculture Rafael Eitan told the Jerusalem Post that
Israeli water needs made it imperative for Israel to retain control over
those areas.

Indeed, the Oslo Accords tried to cement Israeli control over the water
resources there, and as late as the Camp David negotiations the Israeli
side clearly stated that it would not accept any autonomous Palestinian
control over the Western Aquifer.

Overlay a map of the wall on a map of the West Bank's aquifers, and the
picture becomes clearer. The course of the wall neatly takes in the main
basin of the Western Aquifer. Former Israeli Prime Minister Benyamin
Netanyahu's defense minister, Yitzak Mordechai, during his tenure
proposed that the green line should be moved 6-15 km east for this
purpose. The wall has achieved this in fact.

With complete Israeli control over the Western Aquifer, Palestinian
agriculture will cease to exist in the northern areas of the West Bank,
leaving those farmers no choice but to either become cheap labor on
Israeli settlements or seek alternative employment in the major
Palestinian cities. Some villages, including Nazlat Issa, Baqa Al
Sharqiyyeh, Izbet Jubara, and Al Tayyeh will be unable to survive,
further cementing Israeli control over the land.

This is a process that has already started. The building of the wall has
so far resulted in the confiscation of 36 ground water wells, a total
loss of 6.7 million cubic meters of water per year. A 35,000 meter-long
drip irrigation network has fallen under Israeli control, and 10,000
heads of livestock have lost access to grazing land. For the year 2003,
the cost to Palestinian agriculture production has been 2,200 tons of
olive oil, 50,000 tons of fruit, and 100,000 tons of vegetables. In
formerly fertile areas a process of desertification has begun, with
83,000 trees uprooted and 14,680 dunams already turning barren.

To illustrate the effect on a single village, Jayyus, just east of
Qalqilya, has lost 72 percent of its irrigated land to the wall, seven
ground water wells, and 300 families have lost 100 percent of their income.

The decimation of the agriculture industry could in turn also have
serious repercussions for final status negotiations over water. The
Palestinian side will find it harder to justify its claim over water
resources if its need has declined along with the industry. Its hand
will be weakened. The wall will leave the Palestinian areas dry and
thirsty, and it is designed for that purpose.

