The near collapse of the roadmap in a hail of suicide bombers and
helicopter gunships in the course of the past ten days is a poignant
reminder of the fragility of our efforts to achieve a two state
solution. Indeed, the idea of an agreed two state solution for Israelis
and Palestinians has a very short and troubled history.

Throughout most of the conflict, international efforts to achieve a two
state solution, including of course United Nations General Assembly
Resolution 181                                             of 1947, were
systematically rejected by the Palestinian leadership (and accepted by
the Zionist and later Israeli leadership). Only in 1988 did the
Palestinian National Council, meeting in Algiers, ratify 181 for the
first time.

By that time the Israeli leadership had long abandoned the two state
solution, in favor of a variety of alternatives that were developed and
advocated after the 1967 conquest of the West Bank and Gaza Strip:
returning part of the territories to Jordan; autonomy; "Jordan is
Palestine", etc. Even the 1993 Oslo agreement
                                           , though made possible by the
PNC's 1988 decision                                             , failed
to provide bilateral endorsement for the two state solution. In the
ensuing years, Israeli prime ministers Rabin and Peres were able to
skirt the issue because they were concentrating on Oslo interim
agreements. PM Netanyahu rejected a two state solution.

Only in the course of the past three years has an agreed two state
solution emerged. It was Barak, at Camp David and Taba, backed by United
States President Clinton, who first offered the Palestinians a state of
their own. When Yasir Arafat rejected the terms of that offer in favor
of violence, it became officially "null and void." Then Ariel Sharon
became the first Israeli prime minister to officially endorse the idea,
and George W. Bush the first American president to make a two state
solution an official goal of US Middle East policy. Only in March 2002
did the UN Security Council, in Resolution 1397
                                            , endorse the idea--at about
the same time that the Arab League ratified it within the framework of
the Saudi initiative                                               . It
is of course striking that this rush to embrace a two state solution
took place only after the process itself had collapsed into violence.

This brief survey of the short history, and consequent fragility, of the
two state solution is particularly significant for those in the peace
camp, in Israel and beyond, who have believed in and worked for this
solution for decades, and who take it for granted.

It should not be taken for granted. While most Israelis today favor a
two state solution, many of the critical actors are less than fully
committed. Sharon's version--a chain of non-viable enclaves--is a sham
and a non-starter with Palestinians, hence not a formula for an agreed
solution. The most energetic and dedicated sector on the Israeli
political scene, the settlers, are working hard (at times with Sharon's
help) to make a viable two state solution impossible.

While most Palestinians endorse the idea, they also insist that Israel
accept the right of return of Palestinian refugees to the Jewish state,
which contradicts the logic of a two state solution and is unacceptable
to the Israeli mainstream. And President Bush has yet to prove that he
is willing and able to enforce or impose his welcome vision of a genuine
two state solution.

Meanwhile the settlements and outposts spread, ostensibly ensuring that
Israel will "win" the territorial war, even as Palestinian population
growth ensures that Israel will lose the demographic war and cease to be
a Jewish, democratic state. With every passing day it becomes more
difficult to repartition mandatory Palestine, in the language of 181,
between "Arab and Jewish states." More and more Palestinians, including
many moderates, are reverting to advocacy of a single state solution,
which might be called "Israel" for a few decades but will gradually
become an Arab state with an embattled Jewish minority.

After the Oslo Declaration of Principles was signed in September 1993,
many key actors and observers pronounced the Israeli-Palestinian peace
process and a two state solution "irreversible". The past 32 months have
demonstrated just how mistaken they were. Nothing appears to be
irreversible in this conflict. Hence we must be cautious in defining
that virtual red line of geography, demography, hatred and politics
beyond which a two state solution is irretrievable. Certainly the
mainstream on both sides has not given up on the idea.

Yet unless Israelis can demonstrate convincingly a state-level capacity
to roll back the settlement movement, and Palestinians can prove at the
state level a capability of stopping violence and honoring the Jewish
nature of Israel, the two state solution is liable to be seen in
historic retrospect as a very brief episode in the tragic annals of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

But how do we manage the conflict without it?

