Since other articles in this forum will present the Israeli perspective,
I will commit myself solely to the Palestinian perspective.

During the government of Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas, a man
who always openly expressed his support for peace efforts as the way out
of this bloody conflict, a Palestinian-Israeli committee was formed to
deal with the issue of incitement. Notably, the Israeli government saw
it as a committee for handling /Palestinian/ incitement. In response, in
August Palestinians republished the 1997 presidential decree against
incitement, which was issued by President Arafat as one of his
obligations after talks with Benjamin Netanyahu's government at Wye
River Plantation.

Subsequently, I began to see how many Israeli journalists and foreign
correspondents in Israel and the Palestinian territories picked up on
the issue of "incitement" and began to move across the barriers erected
to separate the Palestinian and Israeli sides from each other in order
to cover the story. Many of these journalists asked me for my opinion on
the subject, but what caught my attention most was their reiterated
accusations that the Palestinian educational curriculum and media was
full of incitement.

While speaking to the correspondent of the /Wall Street Journal/, I
related to him that the Palestinian governmental television and radio
stations are those least watched and listened to, and are not at all
influential in forming Palestinian public opinion. I told him that,
according to public opinion polls, only five percent of Palestinians
watch government television, and that only ten percent of Palestinians
rely on its news reports, according to a survey carried out in October
2003. I also told him that all serious studies that have been done on
the Palestinian school curriculum demonstrate that it is free of any
text that might be considered incitement--that is, of course, if we
agree that incitement means pushing the audience to hate others for
their religion, ethnicity or opinions.

Still that correspondent continued his deluge of questions: "But an
Israeli official asserted to me that a Palestinian math teacher in an
elementary school in a Palestinian village teaches his pupils
mathematics by using numbers of murdered Jews in questions of addition
and subtraction."

I could not respond. Who can really give a negative or positive answer
in this case, when no one knows who collected that information, and in
which school and village it took place, or the name of the teacher? All
the same, this "example" was used by the Israelis to prove the presence
of Palestinian incitement in school curricula. It was evidence used by
an official. Notably, the story has no room for a narrative that states
that Israeli soldiers' humiliation of Palestinians has an impact and is
a source of "incitement."

Yesterday, Agence France Press Jerusalem bureau chief Christian Chaise
protested via letter an article published by David Bedein entitled
"Press Passes for Terrorists," which was published in
/FrontPageMagazine.com/ on November 13, 2003. The author wrote that
Palestinians seek to acquire press cards from the Israeli Government
Press Office in order to facilitate their alleged terrorist activities.
The author proffered the example of a stringer that he claimed worked
for AFP in Jenin and had been arrested by Israeli forces for being "a
terrorist." The writer used this to "prove" that Palestinians who work
for the foreign press in Israel are terrorists, or at least potential
terrorists.

The director of AFP in Jerusalem denied the story and challenged the
author to substantiate it. Consequently, David Bedein apologized in an
open letter to the Foreign Press Association in Israel, and said that he
had used sources in his article that proved unreliable.

But the damage was already done, and there was no notice placed on the
website that published the article indicating that the story was false.
The extent of the change made was for the author to strike the line that
accused the foreign press and Palestinian journalists of being
terrorists, and supporting terrorism. But this all stemmed from a purely
fabricated story about an alleged terrorist stringer!

So where then are the boundaries of incitement and political propaganda,
and when do public relations reach their limit?

I fear that the media has become a "channel without a filter," that
passes "messages" which politicians, security people and the military
desire to send to the public, in this case, the Israeli public and world
public opinion. Both of these publics are targeted because--after
all--this competition is over who will win their favor.

The mechanism is very simple, particularly when the media does not
question official stories, especially those coming from the military.
When news stories are related to Palestinians, the principles of the
profession, which dictate checking the source from a variety of
perspectives, seem to vanish. These principles are ignored in favor of
other principles: "national considerations in time of war."

This holds true in the opposite direction, as well, but the Palestinian
and Israeli media experiences are vastly different. Each varies in
structure, history, and composition, and has a subsequently unique
impact. Israel's media is immeasurably more influential, however, and
when it errs, the consequences are graver and more dangerous.

I rarely find that anyone is interested in asking how this accumulation
of hatred latent in the philosophy of the official line in times of war
can be erased. Its impact on both the Palestinian and Israeli publics is
very serious, and it will be difficult to rid ourselves of this hatred
when the need for "propaganda" ends, and is replaced by public relations
experts committed to reestablishing the bridges of confidence that allow
for the minimum of coexistence between our two peoples.

