Palestinian politicians are now frequently being asked by journalists
and diplomats whether they are preparing themselves and their people for
the same possibilities as Israeli officials are readying for. They mean,
of course, supplying the public with gas masks and making other
preparations that assume that Iraq will send our way missiles carrying a
conventional or nonconventional payload.

The negative Palestinian answer is usually surprising to these
questioners, because it tells of a different kind of preparation and
warns of a very different kind of danger. Palestinians are very worried
about this war, specifically about the current right-wing extremist
government in Israel, which is hostile to the Palestinian people and
their leadership, and what it might do to us, taking advantage of the
war and the subsequent diversion in the attention of the international
community and the media.

Rightly or wrongly, the Palestinian side is not preparing for Iraqi
attacks because on the one hand, there is a prevailing feeling among the
leadership and their people that Iraq will not send missiles to this
region, and on the other hand, the Palestinian Authority simply is not
capable of making the same extensive preparations as the Israelis. Our
infrastructure is barely hanging on.

Still, Palestinians are worried about the possibility of war because
they fear a subsequent and dramatic change in the regional balance of
power, which is likely to shift away from the Arabs, including the
Palestinians, and could leave a significant mark on future negotiations.
Palestinians are not able to take seriously American hints and oblique
promises that after the war, the Middle East conflict will have its
moment of truth. They see the war merely as a way to justify the current
postponement of talks and freezing of all international (but especially
American) diplomatic initiatives. In turn, the war is offering the
government of Ariel Sharon the opportunity to continue its violent
attempts to achieve its objectives by force and bring the Palestinians
first to collapse, and finally to surrender.

Early warning signs of a deepening Palestinian crisis are already
showing themselves. The American administration has been angered by the
European position on Iraq and this is negatively affecting American
support for and involvement in the activities of the "Quartet," the high
level committee on the problems of the Middle East. In turn, the
Europeans have suddenly moved to justify their role in the Middle East
and the existence of the Quartet by turning on a dramatic wave of
pressure directed at Palestinian President Yasser Arafat. This week saw
European officials pressing Arafat hard in an attempt to deliver him to
the Americans on certain points - points the Palestinian leadership has
resisted so far. These include the appointing of a prime minister and
vice president.

It is not difficult to see, then, why most Palestinians do not think
that the war in Iraq will have a strong direct or dramatic effect on the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, other than indirect consequences such as a
delay in diplomatic intervention, a possible escalation of Israeli
pressure, and of course, a long-term destabilization of the regional
balance of power.

