Q: When did the discussions over a Palestinian prime minister
first begin?

A: Four years ago we began discussing this kind of change, but
for administrative reasons, not for political reasons. For a long time,
we discussed the issue with Chairman [Yasser] Arafat, but he always
refused. He wanted one man in charge of things, not two. But after the
pressure brought to bear by Europe and the United States, then he
finally agreed.

Q: Why is it important, from your perspective, to appoint a
prime minister?

A: We need to have an authority to coordinate between the
ministers and we want to have one man to ask questions of in the
Palestinian Legislative Council. According to the Basic Law, we cannot
ask Chairman Arafat [the administrative questions that we have]. We need
someone to take responsibility for the ministers; this is important for
us as we organize and clean house.

Q: What do you think will be the prime minister's most
important duties?

A: It will definitely be the internal situation. He must have
full authority over all of the internal situation: ministers, the
economy, local security. All executive authority must be in the hands of
the prime minister.

Q: What powers did the Legislative Council grant the prime
minister?

A: We created a separation between the office of president and
the executive branch. We gave full authority to Abu Mazen in local
politics, but not in terms of political issues. Here Chairman Arafat is
number one, because he is chairman of the Palestine Liberation
Organization. But I think that Arafat wants to change this point.
Perhaps he himself wants to be head of the ministers.

Q: Are there some people who do not want Abu Mazen (Mahmoud
Abbas) to be appointed as prime minister?

A: No, all of [the mainstream political faction] Fateh
supports him. But maybe Arafat won't. I think that Arafat would have
preferred a technocrat, rather than a political figure--but we refused.
We Palestinians are not a regular case. We have very big problems and we
need a political man [to handle them], a man from the Fateh family. We
need a strong man, not one who will start from zero.

Q: Do you feel that current interior minister Hani Al Hasan
has been successful in managing Palestinian security issues and how do
you think Abu Mazen will fare in this regard?

A: We must give [Al Hasan] more time, but now everything is in
the hands of Abu Mazen. If Abu Mazen wants him, OK, but [Abu Mazen] will
now create a new government and chair that government and it will be up
to him to decide. I am only afraid that Arafat wants to be a partner in
the government.

Q: There are some people who oppose the appointment of a
prime minister?

A: I think that the average person just doesn't care, but some
of the opposition parties, like Hamas and Islamic Jihad, are opposed.

Q: When you look at Palestinian democracy today, how would
you describe it?

A: I think that we need democracy, but our situation is very
difficult. How can we reform and build democracy with the occupation,
and alongside the Israeli closure? This is very difficult at the same
time that we need a new political system. We must establish real
democracy because without this, we cannot build our state. Democracy is
[therefore] very important to us.

