Contrary to popular belief, the appointment of Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen)
to the position of Palestinian prime minister is not a rubber stamp
process. The Palestinian executive and legislature are currently working
together to make this happen as quickly as possible, but we do have
rules and procedures that must be abided by as we restructure our
government.

Today, March 17, the elected Palestinian Legislative Council met for the
third and final reading of the amendments to the Basic Law or
constitution that will create the position of prime minister. Once those
amendments are approved (no challenges are expected) and they are
published in the official gazette, the Palestinian prime ministerial
seat will exist in law.

To arrive at this point, Palestinian President Yasser Arafat first
requested the approval of the Central Council of the Palestine
Liberation Organization (PLO), which is Palestinian people's highest
political authority and includes members from the Palestinian
Diaspora--the millions of Palestinian refugees who continue to live
outside their homeland. The Central Council is the same body that
approved Israeli-Palestinian agreements that created the Palestinian
Authority, of which Yasser Arafat is president today.

After the Central Council voted to accept this new position and appoint
Abu Mazen, who is PLO Executive Committee General Secretary (and second
only to Arafat himself), the Council delegated the Palestinian
Legislative Council (the parliament of the Palestinian Authority) with
drafting the necessary laws. The Legal Committee then hunkered down to
draft those amendments, which have now been read and vetted twice by
both the Legislative Council and the Palestinian justice ministry.

Once the law is finalized, then the president will invite Abu Mazen to
form a government, which will require another meeting of the Legislative
Council to vote in the new ministers.

These complex but important procedures have progressed quickly and
relatively smoothly. Contrary to many press reports, the two main
actors--Arafat and Abu Mazen--have had no significant differences of
opinion. In addition, the process has gained momentum because the
appointment of Abu Mazen as prime minister is seen by most officials as
a positive step towards addressing internal Palestinian needs. Abu Mazen
will have time to manage the cabinet and follow up on the performance of
the various ministries and ministers, which can only improve our
government performance and public support.

Politically, however, the appointment of Abu Mazen is not likely to make
a great deal of difference. First, there are no significant political
differences between Arafat and "prime minister" Abu Mazen. While there
might be contrasts in style and approach, in the fundamental issues up
for political negotiations, there is no significant break between the
two men. Indeed, they agree that President Arafat's negotiating
positions are as flexible as the Palestinian public will allow.

Second, there are no political negotiations to speak of. As long as this
right wing government is running Israel, it is difficult to imagine any
real chance of a peace process rebirth. The government led by Ariel
Sharon is ideologically incompatible with the heart of peace: ending the
occupation. Instead, this Israeli administration is working overtime to
consolidate its occupation of Palestinians, behaving brutally in the
process and inspiring a violent Palestinian response. Under these
circumstances, it is difficult to conceive of an end to the violence,
regardless of who is in charge in Palestine.

This also helps explain why, as interested as Israel and the outside
world may be in the appointment of a Palestinian prime minister, the
Palestinian public remains largely indifferent. With the exception of
the very top tier, the Palestinian people have little to say on the
matter, unless they are speaking to foreign journalists. This is simply
because Palestinians feel that they have much more pressing things to
worry about: finding jobs, avoiding death, and ensuring education for
their children. The Palestinian people bear the deep conviction that the
cause of their suffering and the suffering of Israelis is the Israeli
occupation, which seems nowhere near its final hour.

