Here are two tests of Abu Mazen's capacity, if and when he becomes prime
minister, to function independently enough of Yasir Arafat in order to
have a chance to succeed.

First, will he appoint his own man--say, Jibril Rajoub or Mohammad
Dahlan--as minister of interior, to replace Hani al-Hassan as the
official in charge of suppressing Palestinian terrorism? Al-Hassan
reports to Arafat, who appointed him. Rajoub or Dahlan, both of whom
have had serious disagreements with Arafat in the past year, would
report to Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas). They would also provide him with
some of the security "divisions" he needs to function independently of
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat.

Secondly, when Abu Mazen's senior ministers are dispatched for high
level political talks in Jerusalem or Washington, will they be briefed
in advance, and debriefed upon return, by Arafat or by Abu Mazen? Under
the current state of the reform process which has produced the new
office of prime minister, these ministers will have been appointed by
Abu Mazen. Yet Arafat ostensibly remains in charge of issues of war and
peace. Whoever briefs and debriefs Palestinian negotiators will be seen
as the real authority.

If Abu Mazen can pass these two tests, then his appointment could
conceivably be termed a dramatic breakthrough. Otherwise, it is merely
important.

Important, because in any event this is the beginning of the succession
process that will eventually replace Arafat. Important, because Abu
Mazen is more moderate than Arafat, and because a full time governmental
administrator is a genuine step toward better Palestinian civil and
political life. And important, because somewhere down the road, the
successor to Abu Mazen (who, at 67, is not much younger than Arafat),
will likely be a younger "insider" Palestinian less burdened than the
Arafat/Abu Mazen generation by the legacy of the naqba of 1948, refugee
status, the right of return, and the heavy psychological need to extract
from Israel an acknowledgement that it was "born in sin."

Not all aspects of Abu Mazen's success depend on him. He enters an
international political equation in which all three serving
principals--Arafat, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and United
States President Bush--have repeatedly demonstrated that they do not
have a realistic strategy for peace. Assuming Abu Mazen can indeed
neutralize Arafat, he will still require from Sharon some genuine
confidence-building gestures, such as military redeployment and renewed
security cooperation, in order even to begin to restore order inside
Palestine. And he will need Bush to begin pressuring Sharon, first on
settlements and then on a rapid timetable for genuine Palestinian
statehood, neither of which Sharon or his government appear capable of
providing on their own.

At present, none of these three figures appears to be genuinely inclined
to help the incoming Palestinian prime minister in a substantive way.
Arafat, typically, is slowing down the appointment process with
subterfuges. Sharon and his new government are expanding the settlement
enterprise. And Bush, with his March 14 statement, is using--or
abusing--the Palestinian issue in order to score last minute points with
the international community prior to going to war in Iraq.

Finally, in addition to his relative moderation and his total lack of
involvement in terrorism, Abu Mazen brings to office one quality that is
unusual in this part of the world, and that may or may not serve him in
good stead: he has repeatedly demonstrated that he is not an entrenched
bureaucrat; he is not afraid to quit his post and go off to Morocco or
Qatar in protest over unfair or ill-considered decisions by Arafat.

This may be helpful, in the sense that he won't let Arafat push him
around. But on the other hand, without near fanatic determination to
succeed in his new job against all odds, Abu Mazen may fail.

