Forty years ago, political and economic conditions in Asia (except
Japan) and in the Middle East (except Israel) shared a number of
characteristics. Both regions were deeply embedded in the gloomy "Third
World." Most governments were controlled by small and corrupt elites,
supported by the military and other security forces. There was no room
for tolerance or pluralism, and the economies were also stagnant.
Violence and conflict were endemic, both internally and between nations.

Since then Asia, including China and India, has made tremendous
progress, both economically and politically, but the Arab Middle East
remains stuck where it was in the 1960s. With the partial exception of
the petroleum exporting countries in the Gulf, poverty has become even
more deeply embedded, and the political systems remain closed. Leaders
are installed for life (and beyond, with the advent of "presidential
succession" in Syria).

In addition to the huge price paid by the citizens of these countries,
such conditions feed the frustration that turns into terrorism and
violence, and the spillover hinders efforts to negotiate a solution to
the Arab-Israel conflict. While the debates continue over the claim that
democratic societies are less war-prone than dictatorships, there is
good reason to accept the validity of this general link, even in the
Middle East.

In this environment, the removal of Saddam Hussein and regime change in
Iraq could trigger a domino effect throughout the Arab world, from North
Africa to the Gulf. While no one can predict what will happen on "the
day after" the war ends, regime change in Baghdad seems to be
unavoidable. Iraq may become unstable and break apart into different
sections, or its different factions could develop a durable working
relationship, allowing for rapid recovery. The current regime may be
replaced by another narrow and closed military or tribal leadership,
continuing the old pattern, but the more optimistic scenarios envision a
more open and responsible government, with at least a modicum of
democracy and tolerance for different views.

Once the floodgates open, the climate of fear in Iraq is lifted, and the
population begins to celebrate its restored freedom, the citizens in
neighboring countries around the Middle East will be infected. Dramatic
leadership change in Baghdad will launch a chain of similar (but
internally propelled) processes in the region.

After Iraq, the Palestinian Authority might well be the next in line.
The Arafat regime has dominated Fateh, the Palestine Liberation
Organization, and then the Palestinian Authority, with no lasting
accomplishments. The hope created with the 1993 "Oslo agreements" has
been destroyed by terrorism and violence. Israeli troops have returned
to the cities, and the creation of a Palestinian state seems as far off
as ever. The economic development that was promised a decade ago has
also failed to materialize, with the blame falling on the corruption and
incompetence of the leadership. Within Palestinian society, this
criticism is growing, coinciding with the demand for regime change in
President Bush's speech of June 24, 2002 on Middle East peace. Thus, the
forces unleashed by the replacement of Saddam Hussein could provide the
catalyst for ushering in a new, more open and democratic Palestinian
society ready to cooperate with Israel in a two-state framework.

To be effective, whether in Baghdad or Ramallah, regime change must be
structural, and not merely the replacement of one dictator or elite with
another. A post-Arafat Palestinian leadership that is under the control
of one particular faction (Hamas or Fatah) and continues to use violence
and fear to maintain power will not change much, either in the political
realm or in terms of economic development. In order to make progress
toward these goals, the new structure must allow for debate and
competition between different ideas, checks and balance among the levers
of power, transparency, and accountability.

The same factors are necessary for the societal transformation that will
lead to peace, and the replacement of rejectionism with acceptance of
the legitimacy of Israel as a Jewish and democratic state. While there
are no guarantees, there is at least the hope that in a more open
political atmosphere, the one-sided history and incitement will give way
to mutual acceptance and a stable peace. A leadership that is
accountable to its citizens would also restore the credibility of
Palestinian pledges with respect to preventing terrorism and in other
critical areas.

As in the case of Iraq, it is probably unrealistic to expect an
immediate transition from the closed "old guard," which has controlled
Palestinian politics for so long, to an open fully democratic political
structure. However, elements for the first stages in this process
already exist, in different forms. Discussions of Palestinian leadership
reform in the past few months, and the circulation of a draft
constitution with provisions for cabinet-based government, are important
elements in this process.

These changes will not be taking place in a vacuum, and parallel
processes are likely to begin in other countries such as Syria and
perhaps Saudi Arabia, in addition to the example expected from Iraq.
While the first priorities will be toward internal political and
economic change, these foundational elements could also help to reopen
the path to peace throughout the region.

