The unilateral Israeli withdrawal from Gaza is creating more problems
than solutions both in Israel and Palestine.

In Palestine, the Palestinian Authority and the relevant donor parties
including the World Bank are unable to identify any benefit to
Palestinians from the move. Politically it won't contribute to efforts
to restart a peace process. Security-wise it won't serve to reduce
violence because all the ingredients of that particular
recipe--continued settlement expansions in the West Bank, the killings
and arrests of Palestinians and crippling economic sanctions--will still
be in place.

In Israel, meanwhile, the plan is being questioned vociferously. In the
eyes of the Israeli right wing, Israel is paying a price without getting
anything in return. More worryingly for a country where the military
remains the backbone there have been serious threats of mutiny in the
army, so serious that leading Israeli personalities within the
government and military elite are wondering aloud whether such a
withdrawal can really take place in this atmosphere.

In turn, these developments have created an increasingly heated debate
about how Israel should respond to resistance to the withdrawal by
Israelis. The main problematic here is how the army should behave if
settlers should choose to refuse evacuation. The only two options Israel
appears to have seem either ineffective or carry the danger of backfiring.

The first option, which has already been set in effect, is to offer
financial compensation. This measure has met with some success but has
also left a hardcore of settlers to whom staying in Gaza is a matter of
ideological and religious conviction. Should financial compensation fail
to persuade these settlers to move, the only other option left to the
army is the use of force. This, however, is something both the Israeli
government and the army would be keen to avoid.

Thus a third option has been mooted. Rather than confront the settlers,
the Israeli army will simply withdraw, leaving them without any
services, whether civilian or security. In other words, these settlers
will be considered as outside the jurisdiction of the state of Israel.

How might Palestinians react to this hypothetical situation?

I imagine there will be two tendencies (we will assume that the settlers
will be heavily armed). The PA will try to establish contact with the
settlers in order to bring about a resolution. The settlers are likely
to refuse any such mediation. In the meantime, others will propose a
more aggressive approach.

What is certain is that the PA will be put in a very difficult position.
On the one hand it will have to try to stop any violent confrontations.
This, however, will on the other hand prove very difficult if, as
expected, the settlers prove to be hostile to any mediation by the
Authority.

In this situation, the PA might ask for third party involvement
including a UN presence to deal with immediate needs and possible
protection. But that cannot be accepted as a long-term solution, because
ultimately the Palestinian side will want to see these people evacuated.
In the long run, the Authority would have to give the settlers a choice:
either they go home, or they agree to live under PA jurisdiction.

The assumption is that the situation would be ultimately unsustainable
for the settlers and it would only be a matter of time before pressure
both from Israel and the Palestinians, in addition to the difficult
circumstances the settlers would be living under, are enough to
"convince" them to follow the only viable outcome in this rather strange
situation, and evacuate.

