Both Israelis and Palestinians approached their mutual negotiating
process with critically flawed concepts regarding ways to achieve their
goals.

The Palestinian approach was clear-cut and unequivocal (assuming Yasir
Arafat indeed sought to reach a conclusive agreement): We made all our
compromises when we agreed to accept a state in only the 22 percent of
mandatory Palestine that comprises the West Bank and Gaza. We already
gave up 78 percent of our homeland. No one can demand more of us. Hence
we are coming to the negotiations to hear how the Israelis are prepared
to give us our 22%, along with East Jerusalem and, at least at the
declaratory level, the right of return.

The problem with this concept is that in logical terms it obviates the
need for genuine negotiation, which is generally considered to be a
two-way process. It also presumes that the other side, Israel, can find
a way to identify or empathize with the Palestinian narrative that
informs this approach. Otherwise, negotiations are doomed to failure.

The Israeli approach assumed a bazaar mentality: The Palestinians are
bluffing and ultimately will agree to compromises. After all, that's
what negotiations are all about. To get the best deal possible we must
begin with a minimalist offer, then increase it in small increments as
the Palestinians themselves begin to compromise.

At the strategic level, Israeli negotiators failed to comprehend the
Palestinians' inability to abandon their narrative and make compromises.
But at the tactical level they unwittingly adapted to the Palestinian
position. Hence every new Israeli compromise, when confronted with an
essentially unbending Palestinian approach, was softened: "this is not
our final word; we're prepared to consider additional compromises." A
few concessionary comments from the Palestinians, and the next
incremental Israeli compromise was forthcoming, following which the
Israeli negotiators would complain that the Palestinians were only
interested in squeezing concessions out of them.

In this way, for example, we witnessed a discussion of territory in
final status that began with an offer by former Prime Minister Ehud
Barak's negotiating team of about 50 percent of the West Bank. It
encountered an understandably contemptuous Palestinian reaction: nothing
less than 100 percent of the territory, accompanied by a readiness to
swap territories on a one-on-one basis to accommodate the Israeli
requirement to annex settlement blocs. There then commenced a process
whereby Israel offered a slightly larger increment of territory each
time, only to encounter a Palestinian refusal to offer
counter-concessions. Within less than a year, at Taba, Israel was
offering nearly 100 percent, and the main discussion was over the nature
of territorial compensation. But by this time both sides had worn out
their credibility and the process ended in failure.

A better approach would have been--and still could be--to set aside each
side's presumed territorial claims at the outset, and instead to engage
in a discussion of vital territorial needs. If each side had begun by
setting out its truly vital "red line" requirements in a two-state
solution rather than one demanding 100 percent and the other offering 50
percent, the negotiations might have been shorter and more amicable. The
Palestinians would have had to prove why they need 100 percent and not,
say, 90 percent of the territory. Israel would have had to prove why its
vital needs in terms of land, settlements and security require it to
hold onto 50 percent, or 80 percent of the territory. We might have
ended up with the Taba maps long before Taba (and the Intifada).

A second key conceptual problem concerns United Nations Security Council
Resolution 242, which is anchored in the Oslo Declaration of Principles
as the framework for discussing final status. It is inadequate as a
framework. It offers no guidelines for solving the refugee issue or the
issue of holy places in Jerusalem. And its formulation regarding
territory is controversial: while Israel adheres to the official
English-language determination that it need only withdraw "from
territories" (Barak even tried to argue at one point that 242 does not
even apply to the Palestinian territories), the Palestinians have
managed to convince themselves and much of the world that Israel is
obliged to withdraw from "the territories." In fact, 242 was meant as a
basis for negotiations between Israel and the sovereign state neighbors
it fought in 1967, not between Israel and the Palestine Liberation
Organization.

A better approach to dealing with 242 might have been to precede the
actual negotiations with an attempt to agree on the parameters of that
resolution's applicability to the process. Alternatively, the parties
might have attempted, on the basis of their discussion of their vital
interests, to formulate an alternative set of parameters.

Indeed, in view of the failure of 242 to generate a peace settlement,
this is precisely what the rest of the world has been doing in recent
months. The Clinton principles, the Saudi plan, and now the Mubarak plan
are all designed to supplement 242 and compensate for its inadequacies.
So are the recent UN Security Council resolutions and the US policy
statements affirming the need for a Palestinian state (which is not
mentioned in 242). These are important efforts, which quite justifiably
seek to compensate for the weaknesses of both Israel and the
Palestinians as negotiating partners.

