In Palestinian circles, the most commonly heard criticism of the
Palestinian negotiating strategy is simply its perceived absence. There
is a widespread impression among many Palestinians, especially analysts
and intellectuals and those who follow the negotiations closely, that
the main defect of the way that the Palestinian leadership has been
negotiating is its lack of a coherent strategy. To be fair, it is
possible that the great imbalance of powers between the two sides is
responsible for this lack of strategy, since Palestinians always find
themselves in the talks in the position of asking and only sometimes
receiving.

In the early stages of negotiations, i.e., in Madrid and Washington, the
Palestinian teams tried to develop a clear negotiations strategy. This
did not work and negotiations came to an impasse broken only by the
successful negotiations in Oslo, Norway--talks that at that time had no
strategy. This resulted in a debate among Palestinians over whether the
negotiators should be as practical as possible and look for results, no
matter how small, that would change the status quo, or if the
negotiators should stick to a concrete strategy despite the possibility
that this could endanger agreement or make it very difficult.

Judging by the results, the nature of the agreements between the two
sides has demonstrated weakness in the Palestinian negotiating
performance. For example, the lack of strategy on the Palestinian side
(and the long-term vision on the part of the Israeli negotiators)
resulted in the creation of the areas A, B and C dividing the
Palestinian territories. If the final objective of the Palestinian
people is to end the occupation, then they should have insisted on one
level of authority, not matter how minimal, over all of the Palestinian
territories. Because Israel has in mind giving up control over only
parts of the Palestinian territories while keeping hold of other parts,
its strategic emphasis was to offer Palestinians different levels of
authority in parts of the territories. In other words, Israel's strategy
served its objectives. Palestinians, on the other hand, either did not
have a strategy serving their objectives or had the wrong one.

Another component of the problem is a conceptual one. The conventional
wisdom is that any negotiations involve compromise, and therefore the
principle of compromise is not up for discussion, only what or how much
will be compromised.

But Palestinians began these talks after they had already made their big
compromise. Palestinian rights include those beyond the Green Line, in
what is now Israel, rights that they sacrificed in order (they thought)
to get all of the land occupied by Israel in 1967. But because
Palestinians came to the negotiations after making this compromise, they
ran headfirst into the Israeli assumption that negotiations were to
progress over the territories occupied in 1967--i.e., that more
compromise would follow.

In the final status negotiations, Palestinians seemed to have learned
these lessons. More or less, they had a comprehensive vision of what
they wanted and their performance did not contradict that vision. The
result was the collapse of negotiations.

Now the same question raises its head. Are we now destined to repeat the
previous experience of entering negotiations for practical objectives,
no matter how painful the compromises? Or is it simply that the
Palestinian leadership's back is to the wall because the issues up for
compromise--Jerusalem and the refugees--have the power to cripple its
public position and power?

