Palestinian leadership circles are cautiously optimistic due to the
renewal of high-level American contacts. United States Secretary of
State Colin Powell met Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei on May 15
and today, May 17, the prime minister heads a delegation that will
confer with US National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice in Berlin.

These contacts are a drink of water after a long drought. The most
recent high-level Palestinian-American meeting was last July when US
President George W. Bush received previous Palestinian Prime Minister
Mahmoud Abbas in the White House. Hence, Palestinian optimism is based
on the analysis that the renewal of discussions reflects a US revision
of its approach to the conflict, which until now has been to neglect and
openly boycott the Palestinian leadership and--lest it be forgotten--the
Palestinian people in general.

It is possible that this revision comes as a result of the widespread
belief that US Middle East policy is suffering and that the perceptions
of the United States and Americans in the region are badly
deteriorating. One of these failures, after all, resulted from hasty
American support for Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's plan for
Gaza. Regrettably for all except Sharon, the president of the United
States spent what he did not own for a commodity that Sharon never
delivered.

Bush rewarded Sharon for his vague plan by conceding international
legality, only to find belatedly that Sharon was unable to implement the
plan he was rewarded for. This was an embarrassing setback for the Bush
administration and for US Middle East policy in general. And it comes
hand in hand with other failures, including the dramatic increase in
Israeli violence against Palestinians as exemplified by the unnecessary
killing of an unprecedented number of people in Gaza, as well as the
difficulties that the administration is facing in its occupation in
Iraq, including the awkward prisoner abuse scandal. The hope here is
that perhaps the Americans are turning a corner.

The other reason for optimism among Palestinians is that this meeting
coincided with the news that the most recent meeting of the Quartet, the
Middle East working group made up of Russia, the United Nations, the
United States and the European Union, has decided to commence
discussions of--and perhaps even codify--an "implementing mechanism"
that will go beyond the usual Quartet reiteration of commitment to the
roadmap and try to stipulate how and when practical steps should be
implemented by the parties.

There is, of course, a great deal of caution bound up in this new
optimism. Palestinians also fear that this meeting is only designed to
serve American public relations needs and defuse the growing anger
against and criticism of the United States in the region. One indicator
of the possible lack of seriousness were Colin Powell's recent comments
about President Arafat. They seem particularly odd given that nearly all
involved have acknowledged that the Palestinian people can only be
delivered to the peace process and a ceasefire if the president throws
his political weight and endorsement behind it.

The unilateral Israeli approach is facing a deadlock, whether it comes
from inside Israel or from Palestinian-Israeli relations themselves. The
recent escalation in violence should be encouragement enough to find
another way out. Given a possible renewal of American and international
peace efforts, it is useful to remind all involved that while it is very
hard to make a unilateral approach succeed, a comprehensive package of
three components--security, political rewards and economic benefits--has
a good chance of success. But every component must include enough
reciprocity to allow each of the two sides to feel that they are making
progress towards their respective objectives.

