Today I went to the community center in my town of Rafah, here in the
southern Gaza Strip, only to find people frantic with worry. Israeli
tanks have closed off our town and there are reports, even now, of more
tanks being moved in to the border area between Gaza and Egypt. Several
of us in the community took it upon ourselves to try to calm the
residents, many of whom were packing their things and abandoning their
houses in fear that Israel would fulfill its threats to demolish them.

You must stay, we told them. We cannot have a third catastrophe. We have
lived two wars and left two homes. We have no option but to stay.

Rafah has had more than 1,100 homes demolished over the course of the
last three years. Those who have been made homeless are now renting in
other parts of the town, but there are no more homes to rent. Outside
this very community center, there are families living in the soccer
field. Some are staying in schools at night, and still others are living
in tents in the street.

We told them that there are contacts between the Palestinian Authority
and the United States, between Egypt and Israel. But who can say what
will happen to these people in the coming hours? Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon wants to finish off Rafah, and if he wants to level the whole
place, he will.

I heard what Secretary Colin Powell and National Security Advisor
Condoleezza Rice said about the Palestinians after their meetings with
the Palestinian Authority. And I have to say that they are fooling no
one. While the Americans want to appease the Arab world by showing that
they are meeting with our leadership, the truth will be written in my
town, perhaps tonight. The common denominator between this American
administration and Israel is their mutual wielding of power and
violence. Together, Israel and the United States have chosen to isolate
the Palestinian Authority. Now we will see if the United States will
sanction more bloodletting of innocents. Rafah is surrounded by Israeli
checkpoints and settlements and our people have no escape.

And I believe it will be a massacre if the Israeli military enters Rafah
in order to demolish those homes along the Gaza border. People here are
preparing themselves. They will not surrender to the bulldozers in
silence. The Israelis will come with many weapons, and the Palestinians
will use what they can.

Two nights ago, two missiles were fired from a helicopter at two in the
morning into the offices of my newspaper, al Risala. The computers, the
furniture lie in smithereens. That office sits in the middle of a
residential area in Gaza City. Israel is trying to smother even our
ability to speak.

Mr. Bush, you have the power of the presidency in your hands. I believe
that you know the truth. You know that the Palestinian people are living
under a terrible occupation. You know that our days and nights are
haunted by screeching missiles flung from the sky. You know that the day
that we do not see death is a rare day in our lives.

How then do you, as a man committed to democracy, agree with Sharon's
practices? I am asking you now to live in our tragedy, to listen to the
crying of our frightened children, to hear the frantic voices of my
people. Listen very well, and then decide.

