Q: From your experience, what have been the strong and
weak points in the negotiating process?

A: First of all, when you look at the negotiations on the Israeli
side, they are all dependent on who makes the understandings. The
Palestinians have not changed their strategy, but from the Israeli side,
we have seen many strategies.

From the beginning, when we prepared for the Oslo talks, we put the core
of our effort on ending the occupation over the territories of 1967 and
how to establish our national state with rights for refugees, according
to [United Nations Resolution] 194. I think that all the faults of the
Oslo agreement are very clear now. Its base is very clear--how to end
the occupation gradually. You will find that in the agreement itself,
the West Bank and Gaza Strip are one territorial unit. The base [of the
agreement] was that this is Palestinian territory, and that the talks
would put an end to the occupation. In the peace process negotiations,
we spoke about "Gaza and Jericho first" and we discussed an interim
agreement for the West Bank. In the West Bank, we set a gradual
redeployment with three phases after the first redeployment, and we
began this. It was after this that the Israelis began to challenge this
concept.

About Jerusalem, which was a difficult issue alongside the refugees, we
agreed that Jerusalem was to be part of these talks. Beyond that, we
discussed the Palestinians in Jerusalem, that they were a part of the
Palestinian people, and that they would participate in the Legislative
Council and in elections. We got that.

Q: Was there a basic strategy that you used?

A: Our strategy was to use the interim solution to continue towards
the final. This was the clearest point of our strategy. Towards that, we
got the Israelis to agree that the territories were based on [United
Nations Resolution] 242, meaning that historical Palestine would be
divided into two states--a Palestinian state of the West Bank and Gaza,
including East Jerusalem, and the Israeli state on the other part of
historical Palestine.

During this time, the Israelis started to focus on "peace and security."
We succeeded in some areas of security and we failed in others. In the
beginning, they [the Israeli side] changed some strategic elements and
the concepts of Oslo gradually. In the Gaza-Jericho agreement, they
asked about some issues that were new obstacles. It was a big mistake
for the Palestinian side to agreed to some of these elements, for
example, when they agreed that the international passages in Rafah and
Jericho would be considered military installation areas. This was then
used to put up many obstacles opposing the movement of Palestinians and
to concentrate on security, not political, concepts.

The other element that gave them new ways of concentrating the
occupation, rather than moving to end the occupation, was when a zone
was created around the settlements, especially in the Gaza settlements.
This zone was used not for security, but to expand settlement activities
and make Palestinian movement more difficult around this area.

Further, they used the three lateral roads to put new obstacles inside
Gaza itself. Later, we saw that practically the Israelis can cut Gaza in
three or four areas using the settlements, the roads and the beach of
the Gaza Strip.

Q: How did this affect the outcome of the talks?

A: The Israelis were not looking for peace, they wanted to use
security as a solution. This became more apparent when we came to the
interim agreement for the West Bank and they asked and succeeded in
changing the concept of the Declaration of Principles to divide the West
Bank into A, B, and C, the populated and unpopulated areas. This was the
first stone to break the [back of the] Oslo agreement and give the
Israelis the upper hand in controlling the agreement itself. In my mind,
it was a strategic mistake for the Palestinian side to agree. They then
became locked in a policy dependent on intentions. And we paid the price.

What has happened now is that they have used all of this against us,
especially when the Likud came to power. Maybe with the Labor Party, we
could have continued after this strategic mistake. But when you have the
Likud party, which is already against Oslo itself, this strategic
mistake was used against the Palestinians and against the peace process.
They put up obstacles and opened the road for settlement activities.

This was when Palestinians lost hope. It started with the coming of
Benjamin Netanyahu, and the changing of the concept of the relationship
itself. Instead of having peace, we had to protect what we had gotten.

Q: How can things progress?

A: At this time, with Sharon, I think it is very difficult, unless
the international community wants to close the file. In spite of all
that happened with [former Israeli Prime Minister Ehud] Barak and all of
his stupidity, at Taba we built for the future. We have the paper that
was published by Miguel Moratinos, the understandings of Taba that
outlined more than 90 percent of the issues and opened the road to
closing the file.

I think we are very close to closing it--and very far from closing it.
We have documents to close the file, but we don't have a partner to
close the file. Instead of using the paper to close the file, the
Israeli side is using tanks to close it. This strategy puts the people
under pressure. The Palestinian people want to protect themselves
against Israeli aggression and the Israelis feel that the Palestinian
intifada will continue. Despite what is on the paper, they don't even
look at it. As I told you, if there are no real international efforts,
we will live in the mentality of war.

