What was each side's strategic objective in the peace process during the
years 1999-2001?

Israel sought to exploit the chance to reach a framework agreement on
final status that would constitute the end of the conflict and resolve
all mutual demands. The government of Ehud Barak opted for a political
process that would focus on what is genuinely vital: the long-term
existence of a Jewish democratic state within internationally-recognized
borders; the strategic goal of a stable and fair peace, one that would
endure even at times of crisis.

The Palestinian concept was not monolithic, but can be generalized as
based on emotions of justice and grievance, and on the exploitation of
political negotiations as an additional phase in a clash of cultures and
as an instrument for righting an historical wrong. A political solution
was understood by some in the Palestinian leadership (first and foremost
Yasir Arafat) as a temporary, tactical tool, one not intended to bring
about an end of conflict, but rather only to enhance the Palestinian
position in anticipation of the next phase in the struggle.

This conceptual gap affected the unfolding of events far more than the
mistakes made by each of the parties and the mistrust that characterized
their relationship along the way.

Is it really possible to solve such a complex, multi-dimensional,
ethnic-religious-national conflict by means of political negotiations?
The final status issues for the most part have multi-dimensional
ramifications: national, emotional, primordial, religious, existential,
sovereign.

The government of Israel replied in the affirmative. From its
standpoint, this was a conscious decision in favor of a painful historic
compromise that would respect the rights of the other side: ending the
occupation through mutual compromise.

Evidently, though, this would not have been the Palestinians'
perception, had they been asked at the time. Their suspicions that
Israel was seeking a way to deceive the world and perpetuate the
occupation prevailed over any logical explanation. As they see it, time
is on the side of the Palestinian cause. Hence there cannot and will not
be an end to the conflict, neither officially nor at the practical level.

Against this backdrop of each side's political strategy, we can now
analyze their tactical approaches.

The Barak government had to choose one of two options: a FAPS--Framework
Agreement on Permanent Status--that would deal with all "core issues"
(settlements and territory, borders, refugees, Jerusalem and security
arrangements) and determine for each a substantive solution and the mode
and duration of its realization; or an additional interim agreement that
would postpone dealing with the heart of the conflict.

The permanent status issues are interlinked, rendering it impossible to
isolate any single issue from the others. The approach adopted by the
Israeli negotiators was predicated on a readiness to discuss
far-reaching ideas for solving all these issues, as long as nothing was
considered agreed and binding until everything was agreed.

Accordingly, we focused on an attempt to find the common denominator,
and devoted most of our time to this endeavor. Through an analysis of
shared interests (e.g., peace, a practical solution to the refugee
problem, security separation, economic prosperity) there emerged over
time additional options for a settlement, along with creative bridging
formulae. From the outset Barak was prepared to make an historic
decision, and this approach informed the instructions he gave his
negotiating team.

Among the Palestinian negotiating team were some who sought agreement,
compromise, and moderation. But their influence over Arafat was nil. The
negotiators that confronted us had no more than a virtual mandate. With
a few who will remain anonymous (in order that they not come to harm in
today's threatening atmosphere) it was definitely possible to reach a
reasonable agreement. But when it came time for a command decision
Arafat dismissed the achievements of his negotiators with the wave of a
hand. Even before Palestinian violence erupted, Arafat did not
consistently and clearly project a readiness to reach a true historic
compromise with Zionism, one based on the partition of the Land of
Israel into two independent political entities. And in the absence of
any other directive from above, the ongoing hostility and wild
incitement fell on fertile ground.

Thus the tactic employed by Arafat was based on the facade of a
political process, but in practice on a totally passive approach. Dennis
Ross, head of the American peace team, recently stated that at Camp
David, Arafat--unlike his designated negotiators--did not propose a
single negotiating idea throughout the 15 days (other than the claim
that the Temple Mount never existed in Jerusalem, but rather only in
Shechem [Nablus]). After the summit, according to Ross, intensive
negotiations resumed between the sides, with the participation of Ben
Ami and Sher, Erikat and Dahlan. Arafat's delegates told him that the
emerging ideas looked good, and he knew that the US was preparing to
present its own proposal based on these understandings at the end of
September. It was clear that a reasonable agreement was possible in the
foreseeable future.

Throughout this period Arafat sought the appropriate timing and excuse
to introduce an additional element into the arena: violence. Arafat,
Ross notes, did not lift a finger to prevent the encouragement and
outburst of terrorism and violence. Toward the end of December President
Clinton did indeed present his proposals, based on thousands of hours of
direct negotiations and his own best judgment as to what the parties
could accept. Arafat rejected them all, both practically and at the
official level. Deep down, according to the head of the American team,
Arafat could not end the conflict with Israel, because this would have
meant his own personal demise.

Thus from the end of September 2000 the dominant Palestinian strategy
sought to exercise pressure on Israel through terrorism and violence,
portray Palestinians in the eyes of the world as innocent victims, evade
any substantive political decision--yet maintain the appearance of
willingness to continue the political process. In parallel Arafat sought
to consolidate international legitimization and national unity in the
Palestinian camp, along with active Arab financial, material and
diplomatic support.

The disputed issues will not change, nor will the solutions. When the
time comes for the parties to end their terrible bloodletting, and when
a balanced and responsible Palestinian leadership emerges, the two sides
will agree on the formula for permanent status. It may be phased; it may
be preceded, as a means of ensuring the democratic Jewish existence of
the State of Israel, by Israeli-initiated separation. I assess that the
agreement will be very similar to the formula that emerged during the
period 1999-2001.

