Q: The possibility has been raised that the Israeli army
might leave settlers behind rather than confront them under Sharon's
disengagement plan. How do you think such a scenario might play out?

A: Well I don't think this would ever happen. It's absolutely out
of the question for the Israelis to ever leave anybody behind. Of
course, they could be using this tactic to force the settlers out.
Without mutual guarantees for the safety of these settlers it is
absolutely impossible for any Israeli government to risk the lives of
any Israeli citizens. So I think it's a tactic to scare the settlers.

Q: It does seems that Sharon is in a bind here. He appears
to want to leave Gaza and the settlers are putting up strong opposition.
If that is true and the settlers are not going for compensation, he is
left with two options: either to confront them with the army or leave
them behind.

A: As I say, I think Sharon is using this as a scare tactic. I
don't believe any Israeli government will leave Israeli citizens behind,
they are sacred, you know. But it is perhaps used as a tactic to say
that "if you want to stay behind you can stay, but then you will be at
the mercy of the Palestinians who will probably eat you because they are
cannibals."

There is some talk about an exchange of populations between Israelis and
Palestinians under a final status agreement in which some Jewish
settlers who wish to stay behind, become Israeli citizens under the
jurisdiction of the Palestinian state, and some Palestinians become
Palestinian citizens under the jurisdiction of the Israeli state. But,
if this happens is has to be by mutual agreement and with safety and
security measures.

But at this stage, after four years of an intifada that has been so
violent, it is impossible to think that any responsible Israeli
government would even venture this.

Q: What would happen?

A: They would be killed for sure. There is so much hatred,
particularly in Gaza, against the settlements and the settlers. The
whole resistance movement in Gaza is actually focused on the settlements.

Q: The PA would then be put in a very difficult situation?

A: The Authority would not be in any position to protect these
settlers. It would risk its own security. People would attack the
Palestinian security officers. I don't think anyone could guarantee
their safety.

Q: On the one hand, the Israeli government is reluctant to
confront its settlers, yet on the other, it is asking the PA to clamp
down on Hamas and other groups. What's going on here?

A: I think there are some elements within Israeli society and the
government that understand that any kind of peace agreement would damage
Israel's chances of expansion, and they don't want this to happen. The
risk of civil war in Israel is quite real. So in a way, some extremist
Israeli elements fearing the possibility of civil war in Israel are
exporting the possibility of civil war to the Palestinians themselves.
Sharon has cut off talks with the Palestinian side and has started to
unleash his army against Gaza, because he wants Palestinians to fight
each other. He is exporting the danger of civil war. He is showing his
people that he is a strong man and he is forcing the Palestinian side
into action, hoping perhaps that this will help him secure his
disengagement plan without risking a civil war.

Q: From the perspective of the international community
isn't there a consistency problem here? On the one hand you have a clear
demand on Palestinians that they confront the armed groups, and on the
other hand you have settlers who under international law are living
where they are illegally. If the international community was to be
consistent shouldn't they demand that both be confronted?

A: Absolutely. There is no way, to my mind, that in Gaza even one
settler will be tolerated. There will be continuous war if any settlers
are left and no one from the Palestinian security forces could protect them.

But I think that Sharon is simply giving settlers an ultimatum, to make
them think they might be left at the mercy of the Palestinians. When we
talk about the hardcore of these settlers, these are basically racist
people. This hardcore might stay and fight, they might be affected by
the Masada complex, but they would not want to be left at the mercy of
the Palestinians, because basically they look down upon us. We are not
equal to them. They are the chosen people on their promised land. We
don't deserve to be even breathe the same air.

