The Israeli public decided to dismantle settlements long ago, as
evidenced by its overwhelming support for PM Sharon's disengagement
plan, including the removal of all the Gaza Strip settlements and four
in northern Samaria.

Indeed, it was only public pressure that led Sharon to initiate his
withdrawal plan in order to generate a political departure that would
extract us from the bloodshed of recent years. This is good news for
those who support the peace process or the ending of occupation
unilaterally.

The settlers, and particularly their extremist leadership, the Yesha
Council, understand that the decision has fallen. From their standpoint
the only way to thwart this move is to prove that it's not feasible.
They are using heavy ammunition: threats to attack soldiers and
assassinate the prime minister, massive disobedience, and above all,
civil war. We, they declare, will have no mercy if you don't accept our
stand and our outlook.

The settlers are exploiting the sense of shared fate and collective
sacrifice held by the citizens of a nation state. Most Israelis find it
difficult to bear the sight of security personnel behaving aggressively
and violently toward Jews; those images are liable to cause the entire
enterprise to fail.

A civil war scare campaign is spreading horror throughout Israeli
society. Its effectiveness is liable to deter us from seeing this
conflict through to its end.

Accordingly, in order to ensure that disengagement takes place without
pushing the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) into a dangerous corner in the
national consciousness, the government must announce a timetable for
taking all necessary measures to remove the settlers from Gaza with
respect, sensitivity, and attentiveness to their needs and their
protest, including financial and other compensation designed to ease the
transition and adjustment.

At the end of this period, following sincere efforts to remove the
maximum number of Gaza and northern Samaria settlers--and at a later
stage the rest of the settlers in the West Bank and Gaza--the State of
Israel will withdraw to an international border recognized by the United
Nations and the world community. From this time on, the remaining
settlers will be permitted to return to Israel's sovereign territory in
accordance with the Law of Return.

These steps will spare us the television images of tear gas, billy
sticks, and women and babies being dragged on the ground, and will
deflate the settlers' struggle. The government must not provide a stage
for the provocative, "heroic" and determined demonstration of opposition
that constitutes the settlers' strongest weapon. Only in this way can we
have a legitimate ideological, political and democratic debate, free
from threats and brutality.

This, then, is the right decision politically and strategically. There
remains the question: if the IDF withdraws from the Gaza Strip, what
happens to the stubborn settlers who prefer to remain in place, without
protection, without infrastructure and without sovereignty? Are we not
responsible for their welfare? What is the obligation of the state to
protect its citizens that are violating its laws and decisions outside
its borders? These are weighty issues.

The dismantling of settlements will determine whether Israel remains a
national Jewish state. Conceptually (not tactically), anyone seeking to
thwart the disengagement by force is a ticking bomb that must quickly be
neutralized. Dismantling settlements is a vital condition for the
existence of the state. Whoever thwarts it endangers the state's future.
When the future of Israeli society is weighed against the fate of a
group of citizens who opt to endanger themselves, the answer is clear.

In parallel, the Palestinian Authority, in full coordination with
Israel, will take security responsibility for the lives of those Israeli
citizens--if there are any--who choose to remain on its territory.

A variety of surveys conducted among the West Bank and Gaza settlers
describes them as a responsible and pragmatic community that will not
betray the interests of the country. Only a minority of between two and
six percent testifies that it will invoke illegitimate and illegal means
to combat the disengagement. These few thousand are holding an entire
country hostage. It's time to turn the tables and say to them: no, you
will not control our fate; the state will dictate your fate in a spirit
of responsibility for all its citizens. Without broad public support,
the vocal determination of this minority will weaken. Withdrawing the
IDF, coupled with an unequivocal statement against forcible removal,
will narrow the confines of the conflict and channel it to legitimate
and democratic paths.

