An American-led attempt to conquer Iraq, remove the Saddam Hussein
regime and destroy its weapons of mass destruction will almost certainly
succeed. An American occupying force in Iraq will almost certainly
pressure neighboring Syria and Iran to reconsider some of their more
hostile and repressive actions. For Israel and other moderate countries
in the region, this is good news. And it is good enough.

In contrast, the ramifications of all this for the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict are far from certain. Not to mention the chaos and hostility
the US is liable to face inside Iraq and in the region once the dust of
battle has settled.

There is a school of thought in ruling circles in the US and Israel,
reflected among some intellectuals and even here and there in the Arab
world, that argues that the US conquest of Iraq will set in motion a
kind of positive domino effect that will usher in an era of democracy,
market economy and stability as far afield as Palestine. The demise of
Saddam will somehow empower democratic-minded people in Damascus, Tehran
and Ramallah to take over; Arafat will be cast aside by the shock wave
from Baghdad.

Through what magical chemical reaction this cause-and-effect dynamic is
supposed to work, no one tells us.

Rather, the following set of events seems more likely: The American
conquerors of Baghdad will almost certainly be met by throngs of
rice-throwing well wishers. When the US forces show the world Saddam's
dungeons, torture chambers and chemical weapons stores, many who opposed
the war will grudgingly justify it (though some will inevitably claim
that these revelations are CIA forgeries). A US military government will
then settle in to the almost impossible task of building an Arab
democracy--a massive and unprecedented experiment in social
engineering--reconciling tribal and ethnic rivalries, and soothing the
inevitable friction with neighbors like Turkey and Iran.

Its actions may inspire democratic-minded citizens of some Arab
countries, but they will also inspire Islamists and other extremists to
incite against Washington throughout the region, and to mount terrorist
operations against America and its interests. The Europeans will have
new reasons to oppose American policies. The challenge of North Korean
nuclear proliferation will demand urgent American strategic attention.
In short, the US will have its hands full. Hence it is simply impossible
to predict the regional outcome, and whoever does so with confidence is
treading on very thin ice.

Many of the optimists are fully aware of these possible scenarios, but
nevertheless predict that, after the conquest of Iraq and despite the
local and regional reaction, the Bush administration will invest new
energies in solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. For some this
means empowering Israeli Prime Minister Sharon to remove Arafat and
implant in his stead a more cooperative regime, which will somehow be
capable of acting on behalf of Palestinians even though it has little
grass roots support and is suspect of collaboration with the enemy. For
the rest of the optimists this means American pressure on Sharon to
begin scaling back the reoccupation and removing settlements.

But President Bush himself has given absolutely no indication that he
intends to follow either course of action. He continues to be
conspicuously uninterested in our conflict; he is the first American
president since 1967 who has said nothing whatsoever about the spread of
Israeli settlements throughout the West Bank and Gaza.

Unlike his father in 1990-91, President Bush has not publicly promised
America's Arab friends a dynamic Arab-Israel peace process after the
war. Indeed, he has said absolutely nothing about energizing a real
peace process after Saddam is gone. Instead, he has sponsored a weak,
convoluted and ambiguous "roadmap" process that seems designed more to
see America and its allies through the war on Iraq than to make peace
between Israelis and Palestinians.

For Prime Minister Sharon and his entourage, the rosy predictions about
the post-Iraq situation are a good excuse not to build a separation
fence and not to stop building settlements. After all, beyond Iraq there
lies a friendly, cooperative Palestinian regime that will make peace
with Israel on its own terms, as will the other Arab countries in the
post-Iraq era.

Would it were so! In the real world, it is much more likely that we
shall have to suffice with the destruction of a regime of psychopaths
who finance Palestinian terrorism and pontificate about the destruction
of Israel. I mean Saddam Hussein, not Yasir Arafat. The latter, bad as
he is, represents a more nuanced, more complicated conflict that cannot
be solved by mouthing slogans about good and evil.

