Q: What is your reaction to {Israeli Prime Ministerial
advisor Dov] Weissglas' comments last week that Sharon's Gaza withdrawal
plan effectively aims to freeze the political process?

A: The position of Israel is very clear and needs little
explanation. Israel remains committed to its initial position that it
has claims to Palestine in general, not specifying any particular area.
Israel works for the implementation of this position. It never formally
recognized any rights for the Palestinians and that explains the conduct
of Israel.

Q: You don't believe Israel is in any way interested in a
Palestinian state?

A: No. I believe very strongly Israel is against the
establishment of a Palestinian state. The declared Palestinian position,
which is very moderate and very conciliatory, that we accept a state in
less than one-fourth of Palestine on the borders of 1967, is rejected by
Israel, and Israel has taken measures to make this impossible.

Q: What do you make of the international community's
position in this respect, accepting a two-state solution but also
Sharon's unilateral plans. Is this contradictory?

A: Yes, it is contradictory, but it is partly because our
performance in support of our own cause is not very well organized and
that may explain why the international community, in my opinion, does
not seem very aware of the issues. We have a definite failure as
Palestinians to extend our views and explain the situation properly so
that everybody can see the reality of the Israeli position.

Q: Do you see any political opportunities for Palestinians
if and when this unilateral withdrawal takes place.

A: The Palestinian performance is not organized, and there
is plenty of room for improvement on how we go about responding. But I
think the Israeli position is very clear, and it is clear what they want
to give and what they do not want to give. Our declared position, a
state within 1967 borders, is still not accepted by Israel. Zionism has
never been interested in Gaza. Israel remains committed to the claims of
the First Zionist Congress. The Gaza issue was not addressed during that
congress. It was obvious right from the beginning that they had no real
interest in Gaza, and I believe they sincerely want to withdraw from
Gaza. Equally certainly they want to exact a price for this, as far as
Palestinian rights in the rest of Palestine go.

Q: There seems to be a dynamic, ahead of any withdrawal, of
escalation, with Hamas declaring they will throw out Israel and Israel
declaring they will not withdraw under fire. Is this a sustainable dynamic?

A: No, it's not. As long as we go about our affairs without
the minimum level of organization we can't get anywhere. Our problem is
that we act without organization. This explains the disarray we suffer
from.

First of all we must realize national unity. We cannot leave the stage
open for every faction to do as it wishes as the situation is now. There
are many points of view and many different strategies on this and that
is the cause of our continuing disarray. What we need is that all
political factions join in one body that we call for instance the
national unity authority or leadership, where they air their views in
detail and then reach decisions democratically to which everybody is
committed. That's what we badly need.

No faction has the right to stay aside and act as it wishes. We are
badly in need of national unity to meet the present challenges. If we do
not do this, I am afraid that we shall remain in disarray.

