Q: What is your message to United States envoy Anthony
Zinni?

A: First of all, we believe that this American administration
has not played a fair and honest role in the Middle East. It bears the
responsibility of what has occurred over the last 18 months.

As such, our message for General Zinni is that if he is coming to make
real peace, he should address the Israelis and ask them to stop their
aggressive attacks against our people and to end the Israeli military
occupation.

If General Zinni is trying to achieve security, on the other hand, I
think he will not achieve anything. He should change his way of
directing the negotiations and offer the Palestinians a political
solution. There will never be any kind of security solution if there is
not a political solution. The Palestinians will not accept any kind of
solution that does not guarantee the end of the Israeli occupation and a
full Israeli withdrawal to the 1967 borders.

Q: Have you heard some of the things that General Zinni
is discussing?

A: I think he is trying to achieve a ceasefire, but in our
experience, the ceasefire will not last for a long time. Any attempt to
reach a ceasefire that disregards political agreements will not succeed.
I hope that General Zinni will understand that if there is a political
solution that leads to the end of the Israeli military occupation within
the 1967 borders, it will succeed and be welcomed by the Palestinian
people.

Q: Can you give an example of the kind of agreement that
would be acceptable to you?

A: A political solution leading to the end of the Israeli
military occupation. This is what the Palestinians are fighting for.

Q: Could that happen in stages?

A: It should be according to a short timetable for full Israeli
withdrawal. If the Israelis do that, in line with the Americans and the
international community, I believe that after the end of the occupation,
we could start real negotiations on the other issues.

Q: How do you expect the Israeli government to react to
Zinni's visit?

A: I think that the Israeli government is trying to destroy the
Zinni mission, as it did with the last two missions. To do that, it
increases its assassination policies and aggressive policies in general.
I don't think that it is interested in peace in this region. This
terrorist government in Tel Aviv is interested in continuing the
aggression against our people. I don't think that there is any chance
for any kind of agreement with this kind of government.

Q: What should Zinni do then to keep the Israelis from
sabotaging progress?

A: First of all, I think he should ask the Israelis to stop
their aggression, to stop the assassination policy, to lift the closure
and also to offer a timetable for full Israeli withdrawal from the
occupied territories. Otherwise, I do not think he will achieve
anything. He will not succeed.

Q: When will Palestinian operations stop?

A: When the Israelis end their military occupation of our
land.

