Palestinians have been looking at and analyzing the French ideas on two
levels. One is the positive fact that a European country, or maybe
Europe in general, is finally coming out with an initiative or idea on
the Middle East independent of the American framework. The second
consideration is the content of these ideas--on one hand new, genuine
and worth examining and on the other hand producing mixed reactions
among Palestinians.

This initiative arrives in the context of growing European frustration
with the American approach to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. That
approach is seen by Europeans as increasingly biased towards Israel, to
the extent that it is crossing certain "red lines" in the Middle East,
including the undermining of the Palestinian Authority and its
president, which Europe has helped to anchor and build.

In addition, Europe is frustrated because the United States
administration is going about diplomacy in the Middle East independent
from any serious consultations with Europe. A useful example of this was
the way the US tolerated Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's
undermining of the Mitchell Committee report, an effort Europe
contributed to significantly.

In the last few months, one must remember, the United States and Israel
have managed to sew up an almost unanimous international consensus
blaming Palestinian President Yasser Arafat and the Palestinians and
placing them under increasing international pressure. When the Americans
went so far as to utilize this consensus by allowing--if not
encouraging--Israel to further punish the Palestinians and nearly
paralyze the Palestinian leadership, at that very moment arrived a
European push supporting the Palestinian Authority, criticizing the
United States' exaggerated bias towards Israel and introducing
independent ideas for calm, in preparation for a revival of the peace
process.

Still, the official and public Palestinian attitude to these ideas is
necessarily a bit more complicated. These ideas are originally two, the
first calling for the organization of elections in the Palestinian
territories "based on the theme of peace," and the second calling for
recognition of a Palestinian state.

Most Palestinians would welcome the idea of elections because they have
been frustrated by not being able to exercise their democratic rights
and continue the elections process as scheduled. In some ways,
Palestinians blame the lack of elections thus far on internal shortcomings.

But despite the warm welcome for new elections, most Palestinians will
still find it difficult to understand how this election will contribute
to the chances of peace between Israel and Palestinians. At the same
time, there are those Palestinian politicians who believe that new
elections would effectively counteract the vicious Israeli campaign of
de-legitimizing the Palestinian Authority and its president.

The final outcome of the elections, surprisingly, seems not to be
worrying Palestinians, including officials. President Arafat and Fateh's
chances of winning appear to be high, not only in their own estimation,
but in that of many analysts. Recent polls showing an increase in
support for opposition factions and a decline in support for Arafat's
camp does not mean he and Fateh would lose. Some of that support for the
opposition is an expression of frustration and a vengeful spirit against
Israeli aggression.

Indeed, while the current popularity of opposition groups is an
expression of support for their resistance against Israeli actions, in
formal elections, other factors--economy, society, women's
rights--become important alongside the immediate political and military
fight against occupation. Too, one must remember that Palestinian
society is largely secular in nature. As such, fears that the peace camp
might lose the elections should probably be lain to rest.

In as much as these elections are intended to serve the goals put forth
in the French proposal, the first objective ("to trigger the
psychological effect that could justify ending the Intifada") does not
make sense to most Palestinians. They understand the Intifada to be a
result of occupation. They expect people to tell them how they might
trigger the psychological effects necessary to end the occupation, which
is the cause of the Intifada, not the other way around.

Too, a state that does not have defined borders will not make much sense
if the borders of 1967 are not included in one way or another. In
addition, a state that does not include any part of Jerusalem is likely
meaningless for most Palestinians and will be difficult to market to the
public.

But more important than all these caveats is this: the declaration of a
state may not end the current violent confrontations, whether the
Palestinian resistance to occupation or Israeli violence intended to
maintain the occupation. That is because some of the Palestinian
territories will remain under occupation and there will be no answer to
the other rights Palestinians are fighting for, such as the problem of
the refugees. An approach depending on a declaration of statehood could
be useful if it is part of a package assuring Palestinians that at its
end will be the end of occupation.

A major concern Palestinians have is the lack of an implementing
mechanism. Without that, the most likely scenario is that Israel will
use the same tactical argument that it used with US proposals--that
Palestinian elections and freedom of movement are only possible with a
complete Israeli-acknowledged ceasefire. That, of course, gives the
extremists in Israel and Palestine the final veto against any
elections--and any progress.

