Q: Over the last twenty years, have you noticed any
fundamental changes in how Palestinians educate their children?

A: The effect of the occupation has been disastrous. Early on, the
whole system was under the supervision of the [Israeli] occupation
authorities, the civil administration. It intervened in the curriculum;
under security pretenses it closed schools and arrested students.

With the establishment of the Palestinian Authority, nothing dramatic
has changed except that the Authority has the entire thing in its hands,
and has tried to revise the curriculum and build new schools. We noticed
some positive changes in the transition period after the Oslo accords
                  .

But with the second intifada and reoccupation, all that was built in the
Oslo period [was destroyed]. There were dire effects due to the closure
and there was the psychological effect on students of the destruction of
homes.

Now with the resumption of peace negotiations--perhaps more than after
the signing of Oslo--there is a continuing Israeli effort to intervene
in the Palestinian curriculum under certain pretexts: to prevent
"incitement" and so-called "propaganda" against the Israelis. The
Palestinian Authority has been under pressure to comply with Israeli and
American demands concerning the Palestinian curriculum, but so far, it
has succeeded partially in resisting such intervention.

Q: Why would Palestinians resist that pressure? The concept
of "peace education" sounds quite innocuous and even desirable.

A: When you look at peace from the Israeli point of view, it is not
only to have the land and the geography, but also to have sovereignty
over Palestinian culture and education and history.

Even if we sign a peace agreement, we cannot sign peace agreements in a
vacuum. Aside from our history and our past, Palestine is part of our
selves, our culture, our education. If I reach a political peace with
the Israelis, that doesn't mean that you disinherit me. That doesn't
mean that you occupy my memory or that you erase my memory. That is what
Israelis want: to erase the personal and collective Palestinian memory.

This is impossible. Even if we /wanted/ to succumb to Israeli pressure,
it is impossible to make a Palestinian teach his child that Jaffa or
Haifa or Palestine before 1948 was not his land. On a practical level, I
would say that most Palestinians want peace. They want peace with
equality and relative justice. But you cannot impose on any people that
they forget their culture.

Q: Are you saying that political agreements need to come
before social reconciliation?

A: I am saying that we must be able to differentiate between a
political peace and cultural reconciliation. If the Israelis sincerely
want peace, then we must work for cultural reconciliation first.
Cultural reconciliation must not be imposed only on Palestinians, it
should be bipartisan. All the political agreements between Palestinians
and Israelis have failed because the Israelis have not come to recognize
that reconciliation should take precedence. Israelis want to impose
their political will over Palestinians, while at the same time imposing
their view of the reconciliation.

They don't even use the word "reconciliation". When we are talking about
"reconciliation", we are talking about two parties on equal footing, two
parties respecting each other's cultures, two parties recognizing each
other's suffering and two parties recognizing each other's history. But
we are facing a party that has the power and that party wants
Palestinians to forget their history and to give hegemony to the Israeli
perspective of Palestine.

That will not happen. Even if we are politically weak, and even if there
are political agreements imposed on the Palestinians, real
reconciliation will not take place if there is no mutual recognition of
the suffering of two peoples.

Q: How serious is this battleground?

A: As I see it, the Palestinian Authority and those who are
supervising the educational system are not doing enough to resist those
pressures. Let's be frank. I know that these issues are being raised in
almost every political meeting. In every education circle out there, the
Israelis are using this issue as propaganda against Palestinians under
the mantle of so-called "terrorism". They say that Palestinians should
change their curriculum in order to fit the peace that they are
promising them.

But [Palestinian officials] are not arguing in these international
forums in order to expose Israeli pressure and to defend their point of
view. This has not been taken very seriously by the Palestinians. We
satisfy ourselves by saying, "No, you cannot impose that," but in the
international arena, we have not done enough.

