The Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the Middle East is purely political.
Sadly, there is no other political conflict where the Torah, the Bible
and the Koran have been so utterly abused to justify injustice.

Some say we must take God out of the Middle East conflict, but I believe
God is the One to solve the conflict. The God I know is the source of
love. As a Christian, I believe that God in Jesus Christ sacrificed
himself to die on the cross and to rise again, bringing reconciliation
and wholeness to the world. The God I know certainly does not cause
tragedies, oppression or injustice but weeps with people in their pain
and calls them to act with justice, compassion and love.

In the Israeli and Palestinian conflict, religious people are divided
into two camps:

One group understands the Holy Writings in a literal fashion, using them
to justify ownership of all the land, the Israeli military occupation
and the building of Israeli settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
There certainly are passages in the Old Testament and other Holy
Writings that will justify political atrocity if they are taken out of
their context and misinterpreted. The danger with this thinking is that
people make God the fighter for partisan human causes, even turning God
into a real estate broker. God then becomes part of the problem.
Forgotten is the essence of God, which is equal love and care for every
race and ethnicity, for people on both sides of the divide.

The other group sees the reality of politics but seeks from the Holy
Writings the ways in which justice, peace and reconciliation can be
accomplished, how religion can positively contribute to the solution of
the Israeli/Palestinian conflict. I believe God calls us to find the
positive values in Judaism, Christianity and Islam where there are more
than enough teachings to build a culture of peace rather than a culture
of war, violence, counter-violence and hatred.

I am sorry to see extremist mentalities and ideologies in all three
religions only adding fuel to the fire of conflict. For us, as
Palestinian Christians, the extremist Christian right ideologies are
imported, not local. They are alien to us and harm us. It is the duty of
religious and political people to combat every kind of religious
extremism, rejecting the idea of God as a ruthless general without
mercy. The God of Jews, Christians and Muslims is a God who wants
justice and only justice for all people.

To resolve the conflict I believe we need to move in two directions:

First, the two-state solution for Israel and Palestine needs to be
implemented. The current Israeli occupation of Palestinian people and
land must end. Occupation is a sin against God and against humanity
because it is destructive for both the occupier and the occupied. God
wants people to live in dignity, with their full human, religious and
political rights.

Secondly, God calls people in all three religions to be prophetic, not
only condemning injustice, but caring for the humanity of all people. He
calls on all of us not only to see God in ourselves, but in those
considered the enemy. Only when the otherness of the other is recognized
and people are given their God-given rights will the Holy Land become a
promised land of milk and honey for both Israelis and
Palestinians.

