Palestinians never took seriously the verbal Israeli commitments to
withdraw from Gaza. This is not only as a result of long, bitter
Palestinian experience not to expect anything good especially from such
a right-wing Israeli government, but also because Palestinians have
learned that there is always a rather large gap between what Israeli
leaders say and do.

Indeed, Palestinians always advise journalists and analysts to bear this
in mind when reporting on the positions and statements of the Israeli
government and to judge Israeli leaders on their practices and deeds
rather than on what they say.

For us, the frustrating thing is that all our warnings about the real
intentions of this so-called Gaza disengagement plan were consistently
dismissed by Americans, Europeans and the international community in
general.

And even after Israeli prime ministerial advisor Dov Weissglas confirmed
that the plan was mainly intended to freeze the peace process and avoid
any talk of a Palestinian state, the international community, especially
Washington, was happy to accept Sharon's "clarification" that he still
supports the roadmap.

Just to be clear, this is what Weissglas told Haaretz in an interview
published on October 8: "[The disengagement plan] supplies the amount of
formaldehyde that's necessary so that there will not be a political
process with the Palestinians."

And just to avoid any confusion about what exactly he meant, he added
later, "The political process is the establishment of a Palestinian
state with all the security risks that entails. The political process is
the evacuation of settlements, it's the return of refugees, it's the
partition of Jerusalem. And all that has now been frozen."

Indeed, the plan would appear to be successful. Practically speaking,
the only tangible outcome of this plan so far is to avoid any real peace
efforts and to prevent the international community, as represented by
the Quartet countries, from taking the necessary steps to bring the
parties, including Israel, into line with the roadmap.

In fact, the logic of the current political reality is leading us in the
opposite direction of any withdrawal. It's neither a coincidence nor a
mistake that while Israel is talking about withdrawal, on the ground
they have just completed the most brutal incursion into the Gaza Strip
in the past four years. And all the time, Israel is consolidating the
occupation by expanding settlements, building walls and confiscating
land inside the occupied West Bank.

As long as there is no political process that promises the Palestinians
a peaceful end to the occupation and the Israelis the prospect of peace,
violence will continue, whether it is the violence of the occupation
asserting itself or the violence of the occupied people trying to free
itself. Such a reality can only lead to re-occupation rather then
redeployment or withdrawal. Furthermore, the logic of such continuous
violence will also only serve to encourage extremists and
fundamentalists in both Israel and Palestine, leading to a further
consolidation of the occupation.

For all these reasons and because it's not part of a political process,
the "disengagement plan" will never improve the chances of peace, nor
will it reduce the hostility and violence. Only a process that involves
the implementation of the relevant United Nations Security Council
resolutions, is compatible with international law and consequently
involves a complete end to this illegal and belligerent occupation, the
root cause of the conflict and the ongoing violence; only such a process
holds any promise of replacing the ongoing violence and hostility with
negotiations to reach agreements that can lead to peace and prosperity
for both sides.

