Education, especially in the Middle East, has been a major tool for
long-term change, as it affects the attitude and behavior of younger
generations and the future. The nations of the Middle East are young by
international standards due to a persistently high reproduction rate.
For this reason, processes like education that affect the younger
generation have great influence, and the relatively weak traditions of
democracy and respect for due process allow populism to gain unusual
significance. Populism, in turn, thrives on an active young generation
and can be influenced a great deal through the schooling process.

For all of these reasons, education is a sphere of intense competition
between the various groups in the Middle East. Many parties are actively
trying to use education to build a peaceful and stable region, propagate
values of democracy or spur economic rejuvenation. The pursuit of these
worthy agendas demands our attention and new educational efforts. At the
same time, this pursuit will only be possible if our new generations are
hooked into the international agenda through the process of
globalization in its most positive manifestations, i.e. by benefiting
from international advancements, while at the same time maintaining a
sense of cultural individuality and uniqueness.

The problem here is that these groups and their agendas do not have a
monopoly on outreach to the region's youth. Education is also widely
used to forward the agendas of traditional forces in power in most
Middle Eastern countries. The ideology of Islamic extremism is one
expression of these traditional forces. Blind anti-globalization
(rejecting change for the sake of rejecting it) is another expression of
the traditional mindset. Certainly, regional detachment from recent
significant technological and scientific developments has been the worst
outcome of such closed ways of thinking and shortsightedness.

Here, in the peace process between Israel and the Arabs, education has
been similarly misused. New generations in Israel, for example, are
taught in ways that encourage widespread racist attitudes and practices
among Israelis about Arabs and Palestinians. (We all know these myths,
which pitch the ignorant Palestinian peasant against the brave,
pioneering Israeli settler or the defeated Arab army against the tiny
Jewish militia--never mind the superpowers that Israel had on its side).
The Israeli official account of recent history plays on these
stereotypes and thus prevents tolerance and mutual understanding--both
of which are crucial to coexistence.

It is only thanks to recent writings by Israel's "new historians" that
traditional Israeli education has come under scrutiny and subsequently
challenged. To base political pursuits on exclusivist historical and
religious beliefs that give rights to only one party is the route to
prolonging this conflict, not ending it.

