Ours is a prolonged conflict, not only with the Palestinian people, but
with other parts of the Arab and even Muslim world. Moreover, uniquely
in the world, our very long history is a never-ending story of attempts
to destroy us as a people. We commemorate the ways in which we fought
back and were saved, through holidays like Pesach, Purim, and Hanukkah.
We mourn our defeats at Holocaust Memorial Day and Tisha b'Av (why don't
we have an Inquisition mourning day?). The Jewish people teaches its
children that they are living life at the existential brink, because in
historical terms, they are; you can't undo 3,000 years of history. We
place great religious and societal emphasis on the sanctity of human
life; but all the while there is a huge cloud of history hovering over us.

Now factor in the face-to-face conflict with the Palestinians over the
Land of Israel/Palestine. It has lasted several generations, but the
last three years have been the worst, due primarily to the suicide
bombings, which send a message of sanctifying death, but also because
conquest and re-conquest and occupation of Palestinian towns and
villages has to an extent dehumanized us. We have more violent crime,
more family and school violence, more brutality in politics. Many of us
have also to a large extent become convinced that the long term
Palestinian struggle (and that of the Islamic radical movements) is
directed not just against occupation but against the Jewish people.
Whether this is a correct judgment or not is debatable; given our
history, it is understandable.

How do we continue to raise our children as proud and aware Jews, and at
the same time isolate and identify the ill effects of conflict and
occupation in order to educate against them? How do we teach them to
distinguish between the Arab and Islamic threat to Israel on the one
hand, and the Palestinian individual with his/her basic human rights on
the other? How can Israel Defense Forces tolerance training for troops
destined to man roadblocks in the West Bank counter the effects of fear,
isolation in enemy territory, and youth and immaturity in Jewish
18-year-olds who are defending their country and people, and produce
more considerate soldiers who engage in less gratuitous violence?

There are other societies, like the United States, which have high
levels of violence--rape, murder, drugs, the death penalty--but for
reasons very different from ours. Some parts of Arab/Islamic society
maintain particularly violent traditions, such as "family honor"
killings of young women and vengeance killings, which have nothing to do
with our conflict--unless, conceivably, they helped cause it. While all
three monotheistic religions harbor in their teachings certain
inclinations toward exclusivity and intolerance, Islam currently appears
to have fostered the most venal and radical fundamentalist movements,
which place not only Israel but increasingly the West in general in an
existential defensive mode that does not easily lend itself to tolerance
training.

Which comes first: political reconciliation through negotiation, or
grassroots reconciliation through education? Ten years of a failed peace
process have taught us that the two must go together. But what inspired
the Cypriot Turks a few months ago to defy their deadlocked political
process and their hawkish leaders and demand to open their green line
boundary to mutual visits with the Greek Cypriots? I doubt it was
anything special in their education under two generations of Turkish
rule. More likely the economic and political incentive of European Union
membership played a key role, at least in the timing, rather than
Turkish Cypriot educational policies and political leadership.

For political, economic and ideological reasons, Israel has seriously
neglected and distorted its entire educational system in recent years.
The most obvious result is the disastrously low international testing
results that were published recently. I doubt we can have better
education for peace and tolerance as long as we don't improve our
teaching of mathematics, science and civics. But even if we do, real
education for peace can only accompany peace itself, or at least an end
of conflict. Peace education, like peace itself, requires a partner.
Most Israelis are certain there is no such partner on the other side.

In this regard, if we can't find a partner for peace, then we must
consider unilaterally disengaging, including dismantling settlements and
building fences on the green line. This may be the only way to save
Israel as a democratic Jewish state that can raise generations of its
children in something approximating a sane atmosphere.

