Israel's periodic retaliatory penetrations deep into the Gaza Strip
nourish a number of assessments about the nature of PM Sharon's
anticipated disengagement plan. Most of these assessments are in reality
little more than conspiracy theories, and most are without foundation.
Both Palestinians and Israelis who oppose disengagement would be far
better off if they saw in Sharon's plan an opportunity rather than a
conspiracy.

For example, for some Palestinians confronting the IDF forays into
Jabalya and elsewhere, the disengagement plan seems to have brought
little more than painful reoccupation. Indeed, one could speculate that
even after the dismantling of Israeli settlements in the Gaza Strip the
IDF may repeatedly reinvade Gaza in response to future Palestinian
Qassam rocket attacks.

Some Israelis and most Palestinians are certain that Sharon's
disengagement plan for Gaza and northern Samaria is a conspiracy to
freeze the peace process and hold onto the remainder of the West Bank.
In an interview a week ago in Haaretz, Sharon's former chef de cabinet,
Dov Weissglas, offered precisely this interpretation of the plan.

Still other Israelis point to the Qassam attacks and argue that Israel
cannot implement its disengagement plan precisely because Gaza is so
dangerous and insecure. This reasoning is mirrored by those in the
Israeli security establishment who interpret the rocket attacks as an
attempt by Hamas to portray disengagement as an Israeli retreat in the
face of a victorious Islamist enemy. The logical corollary of this
reasoning is to insist that disengagement not take place unless and
until the Strip is pacified and Hamas neutralized.

Finally, another camp of Israelis on the left does not understand why
disengagement cannot be negotiated as part of the roadmap or some other
peace process. And of course, we haven't mentioned the settler camp on
the right that opposes disengagement for
ideological/territorial/messianic reasons, and accuses Sharon of having
lost his Zionist fervor.

Nearly all these opponents of disengagement seemingly fail to understand
its most fundamental rationale: demographic security, or the need to
consolidate Israel's population on the one hand, and Palestine's on the
other, so as to ensure that Israel remains a Jewish and a demographic
state and that we stop the current gradual decline into a South
Africa-type situation. That is why disengagement is more about removing
settlements from Gaza than removing the IDF, which indeed will
periodically continue to enter the Strip if it is used as a base for
attacking Israelis, just as the army and the air force continue to
interdict and deter terrorist attackers in southern Lebanon long after
we ceased to occupy that territory.

Nor do the doubters on both sides even begin to appreciate the dynamic
of rolling back the settlement movement in the West Bank that will be
unleashed by the act of dismantling even a single settlement in Gaza.

On this issue it appears that the settlers do understand the real
meaning of a minor disengagement in Gaza, whereas Weissglas--if he was
sincere in his interpretation--and possibly Sharon as well, if Weissglas
was speaking for him, do not. It is naive to believe that you can throw
the international community the bone of disengagement from Gaza, thereby
proving that the settlement movement is reversible, and thus silence its
growing appetite for creating a settlement-free Palestinian state in
both the West Bank and Gaza. On the contrary, you will be showing the
world precisely how it can be done, even without a peace process if
necessary.

Sadly Sharon, who is clearly unwilling to enter into genuine peace
negotiations--or even disengagement security talks--with our neighbors,
is also unwilling and possibly emotionally or intellectually unable to
explain to the Israeli public the urgent and vital demographic rationale
for far-reaching disengagement. That is why he could conceivably lose a
referendum on the issue: the settlers will smother the Israeli public
with protestations of their pioneering Zionist dedication and
willingness to man the front lines against the terrorist threat, while
Sharon and the 70 percent of Israelis who support him will remain
largely passive.

Here the Palestinians hold a trump card. If they can overcome their
inclination to see everything Israel does as a conspiracy, they might
also detect in the Gaza pullout an opportunity. If Yasser Arafat were to
direct his security services, which in Gaza are largely intact, to
restore order in the Strip, a structure of parallel Israeli and
Palestinian unilateral moves would be put in place. The world would see
that Israeli withdrawal means Palestinian law and order. The pressure
for Israel to continue to withdraw from additional areas of the West
Bank would increase, to the benefit of both parties.

Instead of buying into this scenario, Arafat and his supporters insist
that Israel release him from his confinement in Ramallah. Many
additional parties demand that Israel negotiate the security
arrangements with the PLO. But whether we like it or not, Sharon's
refusal is firm on both counts. Coupled with his hidden motives for
disengagement and his inability to articulate to the public the
demographic rationale, Sharon makes his own plan look bad.

This is unfortunate. Under the circumstances, and particularly under the
disastrous leadership of Sharon and Arafat, disengagement is not merely
the only game in town: it is a potentially revolutionary option that
should be pursued almost at any cost.

