Q: What is your general reaction to the French initiative?

A: I think it's very positive that the French and perhaps the
entire European Union are taking a peace initiative. So far, EU policy
regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict has been characterized by
communiques, condemnations and declarations. So a pragmatic approach is
most welcome. Europe needs to define a foreign policy personality,
especially now that the US is not engaging like previous
administrations. I also agree with the French idea of an international
mechanism for ensuring implementation.

Q: And the plan itself?

A: I have some very serious reservations. Of course, any plan that
works is welcome, but I see some major weaknesses in this one.

Q: Let's start with the idea of holding new Palestinian
elections.

A: The elections are supposed to be about a vote of confidence for
the peace process. But when Palestinians don't see the final outline of
an agreement on refugees, Jerusalem and borders--one of the problems
with the entire Oslo process--why should a majority of them legitimize
the process and the Palestinian Authority through their vote? Further,
the institutions of the PA did not inspire the confidence of the masses;
if the process is in a shambles, so is the PA, which is an invention of
the peace process. The elections are presented here as a way of
re-legitimizing the institutions of the PA; in other words, you're
acknowledging that they are no longer legitimate. People won't
legitimize them without assurances regarding the outcome of the process.
Elections need to crown a process, not start a process.

Q: You think Fateh might lose the elections?

A: It's highly probable that Fateh would lose to Hamas, the Tanzim
and other grass roots organizations that run the uprising. I wonder
whether Arafat would accept such a plan.

Q: Let's turn to the second key component of the initiative:
the declaration of a Palestinian state as a starting point for
negotiations.

A: From my modest experience, Palestinians don't see the
declaration of a state within the context of an agreement with Israel,
but as their natural right, regardless of whether there's a process.
When we were negotiating the FAPS [the Framework Agreement on Permanent
Status, the focus of Israeli-Palestinian negotiations during Barak's
tenure] the Palestinians always wanted to keep the declaration of a
state out of the agreement. After this intifada, if anything this
attitude will be strengthened. Statehood could be included only if we
have full agreement and it remains merely to carry it out in installments.

Q: The French initiative to reverse the order is intended as
a kind of political jolt, to break the cycle of violence and reintroduce
political concepts. Does that make sense?

A: Not really. The only element that will change things is if the
Palestinian population sees its main needs agreed upon. The Palestinians
are deeply disappointed with the fantasies of this peace process. Just
because you tell them "now you have a state", they won't take it
seriously. The grass roots organizations that control the street will
not be very friendly to the idea.

Q: The French initiative calls for Israel to carry out a
third further redeployment (FRD) almost immediately.

A: If the government of Israel could agree in principle to the
Clinton parameters, then there would be a basis for a third FRD of
serious proportions. But this is not the case.

Q: Do you see parallels between the French plan and the
Peres-Abu Alaa plan?

A: To this day I don't know if there is such an agreement
[Peres-Abu Alaa]. I met recently with Abu Alaa and Muhammad Rashid and I
don't recall Abu Alaa saying there is a binding convergence. At least
one of them wants to set up some sort of talks with the Labor Party.
Why, if there is a Peres-Abu Alaa plan? In fact, neither is a real plan.
Neither offers details of the attributes of a Palestinian state:
sovereignty, territory, control.

Q: Suppose one of these plans were to be implemented...

A: The Sharon government will survive another year or so, then
probably be followed by a right or right of center government. Now
assume the French plan is carried out, or even that Sharon's own
proposals [for an interim Palestinian state] are accepted, and this or
the next Israeli government negotiates the attributes of a state and
doesn't reach agreement. Will the PA behave like Syria when it
negotiated, failed to get back the Golan, and then did nothing?

These plans repeat a major fallacy of Oslo--and I say this as a friend
of the Oslo process. The framers of Oslo assumed that the creation of
the PA would turn the Palestinian national movement into a quasi-state
that would negotiate its border conflict with Israel to reach a
compromise between two civilized political entities. If there is no
agreement, nothing bad will happen and they will continue to negotiate.
This concept proved to be fallacious. When the Palestinians failed to
achieve their objectives in negotiations, they again became a liberation
movement. Thus our conflict cannot be a border dispute like that between
Israel and Syria merely because the Palestinians declare a state.

