Q: What does the Israeli government led by Ariel Sharon
expect from this round of the Zinni mission?

A: It takes only one to make war, but two to make peace. So I'll
avoid jumping into quantitative analyses about the coming days. From
Israel's perspective, we welcome the mission. To that end, we have moved
forces out of Ramallah and most parts of area A that were occupied
during the terrorist wave of the last two weeks. We are willing to leave
the remaining sensitive areas provided the Palestinians take
responsibility. The process must be reciprocal. We want to resume high
level security talks, achieve a ceasefire and implement the Tenet work
plan.

Q: Prime Minister Sharon greeted the initiative to return
Zinni to the region by foregoing his demand for seven full days of
complete quiet. Why?

A: The rationale for the seven days was to create a dynamic of
quiet to give Tenet a chance to succeed. However, in view of the extent
of the latest wave of terrorism it wasn't realistic to achieve seven
days. So we decided to give up this stipulation and, hopefully, begin
negotiating Tenet. We went the extra mile. But it has to be clear that
if terrorism continues or resumes, we will respond and exercise our
right to self-defense.

Q: The government has agreed to establish a high level
"diplomatic" committee to parallel the security committee. Foreign
Minister Peres is a member. Does this in fact constitute the
introduction of a political element into discussions, and if so, isn't
this a departure from PM Sharon's position until now?

A: The official name of this committee is the Senior Committee. Its
objective is to assist with the talks that take place in the high level
trilateral security committee. Only when security talks have succeeded
can the Senior Committee get into the Mitchell framework and beyond.
Meanwhile it could discuss living conditions, economics and the like.
But we will maintain the principle of no political dialogue under fire.

Q: Are you saying that if tomorrow there is a total
ceasefire, the government will be prepared to discuss political issues
immediately?

A: One lesson we have learned from the past 7 to 8 years'
experience is that both sides must abide by the letter and the principle
of their agreements. Tenet and Mitchell are agreed and must be followed.
We have however introduced one modification: we will judge their
implementation by performance rather than maintaining rigid timetables.

Q: If Zinni succeeds, Sharon's unity government will soon
find itself confronting the first political step of the renewed process:
a freeze on settlement construction. Can it agree to this?

A: The government's official guidelines speak of no new settlements
and a political solution based on [United Nations resolutions] 242, 338.
When we get to the first political bridge of the Mitchell formula, I'm
sure we can cross it. But right now there is no point even in discussing
it in the unity government, which embodies two different ideological
directions.

Q: There has been speculation that Zinni might be bringing
with him a tougher mandate and enhanced authority this time. Do you
think anything has changed in his terms of reference?

A: No, not to my knowledge. My impression so far is that it is the
same mission: implement Tenet, then get to Mitchell.

Q: There was also talk that Zinni would arrive together with
ceasefire monitors, or that they would arrive in the near future.

A: We were never approached on this at all. Monitors may be
appropriate for later stages, but there is no point introducing them
before there is concrete and complete understanding on the ground. After
all, there are acts of terrorism that no monitors can prevent. When we
get to this issue, in accordance with Mitchell, it will require the full
consent of both parties, coupled with clear terms of reference.

Q: How do you assess the commitment of the United States
administration to work for an Israeli-Palestinian peace process beyond
Tenet and Mitchell?

A: I would not presume to speak for the US administration. We have
a common interest in stabilizing the Middle East and achieving a genuine
peace that provides security and prosperity to all. In that regard we
welcome the American contribution, which may vary in scope according to
circumstances.

