Since September 2000 the Palestinians have waged a war against Israel in
violation of their 1993 commitments to give up terror. Even a minimalist
interpretation of the Palestinian goals, in contrast to the credible
assertion that the Palestinian body politic still favors the destruction
of the Jewish state, shows rather meager results for the campaign. After
more than three years of terror, the Palestinians are not one inch
closer to the establishment of a Palestinian state. As a matter of fact,
much of the infrastructure for such a state was gradually destroyed in
the armed struggle, leaving the Palestinian Authority in shambles. While
important Palestinian systems, such as education and health, still
continue to function, other vital services have drastically
deteriorated, most notably public order and the dispensation of justice,
eroding public trust in the nascent Palestinian entity.

This entity has gradually turned into a fragmented society run by thugs
and local warlords. The international community increasingly views the
Palestinians as unable to govern themselves successfully. Even their
supporters are airing proposals for an international trusteeship--an
unlikely scenario--to help the Palestinians in their transition to
statehood.

In contrast, Israel has succeeded in denying Palestinian goals and was
successful in overcoming the international constraints on its freedom of
military action against targets in Palestinian-ruled territories,
thereby denying the Palestinian terrorists safe sanctuaries. Since
Operation Defensive Shield (March-April 2002) the terrorists, primarily
in the West Bank, are on the run. While some aspects of Israel Defense
Forces (IDF) operations still meet with international criticism, there
is much greater understanding for the Israeli need to carry out
offensive actions in self-defense against terrorism. Israel's record in
this respect, the foiling of over 90 percent of suicide bomber attacks,
is remarkable.

Undoubtedly, 9/11 was a turning point in the Israeli-Palestinian war.
This event sensitized much of the world, particularly the US, to the
Israeli dilemmas in fighting terrorism. In contrast, the Palestinian
leadership was hardly cognizant of the 9/11 effects and failed to change
gear by distancing the Palestinian struggle from terror. While the
suicide attacks constituted a serious security challenge to Israel, the
indiscriminate killings of civilians were clearly not perceived by the
international community as a legitimate act of resistance. The suicide
bombers actually helped Israel in the struggle over international public
opinion.

The Palestinians were also intent on internationalizing the conflict and
eliciting international intervention in accordance with the Kosovo
model. They failed, however. There is little willingness to send
international forces to serve as a buffer between Israelis and
Palestinians. Moreover, there is declining international readiness to
render financial support to the Palestinians, due to widespread
corruption. The resulting calls for greater transparency have slowed
down the stream of euros that basically allowed for greater
intransigence among the Palestinians. In addition, the emergence of new
foci for humanitarian aid, Iraq being only one example, limits the
amount of international funds available for transfer to the Palestinians.

Yasser Arafat, the leader of the Palestinian national movement, who was
the darling of even enlightened Western European states, has been
recognized as a curse for his people and an obstacle for peace. Much of
the world has learned to see Arafat as a leading factor in radicalizing
Palestinian society and pushing it to the brink, rather than building a
state.

The greatest Palestinian loss was the alienation of the center of the
Israeli political map and much of the Israeli left. The Israeli left
successfully championed greater empathy for the Palestinians and for the
corrupt Palestine Liberation Organization leadership. This was crucial
for moving Israeli society into greater readiness for territorial
concessions. Yet the Palestinian war discredited Yossi Beilin--now
leader of the new Yahad Party--and his contemporaries, moving Israeli
society into more centrist positions much less in accordance with
Palestinian demands. The majority of Israelis woke up from the "peace
trip" increasingly reluctant to take security risks for an agreement
with the untrustworthy Palestinians.

Israel's proposed unilateral disengagement is a Palestinian achievement
because Israel does not get anything in return for removing settlements
and for withdrawing from most of Gaza. Nevertheless, in light of
Israel's traditional readiness to accept partition and the general
consensus about the need to leave Gaza, unilateral disengagement is not
a Palestinian victory. If implemented, it will not drastically alter the
basic geostrategic equation. Even a similar limited withdrawal in the
West Bank will not be an Israeli defeat as long as Israel continues to
have freedom of action to police Palestinian territories and to control
entry.

The war will continue for a while with oscillating levels of violence.
As war is a competition in inflicting pain, Israel is in a better
position to harm the Palestinians than vice versa. In this war, the
Palestinians have suffered more than the Jews. The constraints imposed
by Israel's democratic character have spared the Palestinians more pain,
but may have prolonged the conflict because the Palestinians have
demonstrated their ability to sustain pain. Similarly, Israeli society
has shown remarkable tenacity and determination not to give in to
Palestinian terror. An assessment of the second equation in waging
war--the ability to bear pain--indicates inconclusive results. This is
not that surprising, as protracted conflict in other ethnic conflicts
usually shows that societies muster tremendous energies and willingness
to pay a heavy price in the attainment of collective goals.

