In theory, democracy and democratization should be good news for the
cause of peace. The logic behind that argument is simply that
democratization offers added opportunity for the public to express its
views and interests and for decision-making bodies to take public
sentiment into consideration. Since the public has a vested interest in
peace, then expanding public access to decision-making circles (which is
what democracy is about) should also strengthen peaceful tendencies in
individual politicians and the government as a whole.

Indeed, the Palestinian experience offers examples supporting that
argument. The 1996 elections, the most prominent democratic exercise in
recent Palestinian history, enhanced and strengthened the peace camp in
Palestine and allowed for stable Palestinian engagement in the peace
process that followed.

Another example is, of course, the recent political reform process that
has spurred steps towards Palestinian decentralization and the
delegation of powers. The elected Palestinian Legislative Council
drafted and then voted for constitutional amendments that created a
prime ministerial post, thereby contributing to a Palestinian political
structure that is more varied, representational and conducive to peace.

But before one gets too comfortable with the thesis that democracy
brings about peace, it must be pointed out that Israel's recent history
discredits that argument entirely. It was free and democratic elections
in Israel that brought to power individuals and political parties that
previously formed the central opposition to the peace process. It was
the exercise of democracy that created this current Israeli government,
one that holds dear political positions and ideologies that are
completely incompatible with the fundamental notions of
Palestinian-Israeli harmony, namely the requirements of international
legitimacy and the principle of exchanging land for peace. Certainly
Israel is not alone in this case; there are other historical examples of
instances when the public voted into office leaders that later proved to
be neither democratic nor peaceful.

It is possible then to conclude that even as democracy and
democratization may help peace along, they are not enough to guarantee
and promote peaceful tendencies. Indeed, there is the need to encourage
and recruit other auxiliary factors. In other words, the peace camps in
both Israel and Palestine need to be more efficient and adamant in using
democratic opportunities to promote their cause, rather than allowing
the enemies of peace to manipulate the democratic competition for power.

Further, those external powers that wield influence over the publics in
our region should invest themselves in the cause of reconciliation. In
this regard, it is useful to remember that the Israeli public, for one,
is very sensitive to signs of approval or displeasure from the United
States government and its people in evaluating the political performance
of Israeli leadership. That factor contributed to the downfall of both
prime ministers Yitzhak Shamir and Benjamin Netanyahu.

