In Israel and Palestine today, we are all seeing the natural fallout of
divergent views of victory, whether they be ideological or political.

Among Palestinians, although there exists more than one definition of
victory, the goals of ending the Israeli occupation, including banishing
the occupation's control from East Jerusalem, achieving independence and
self-determination, in addition to resolving the refugee problem with a
package of solutions that incorporate the right of return, all
constitute a common denominator for victory among the Palestinian majority.

There are, of course, more immediate expressions of Palestinian victory.

The current Israeli government, made up of the same political parties
that previously formed the opposition to the peace process, is launching
a war against Palestinians. Its approach is the wielding of force rather
than negotiations. Its goals include maintaining Israeli control over as
much land as possible while relinquishing itself of as many of the
Palestinian people as it can. Because this contradicts the position of
the Palestinian leadership, getting rid of this leadership and all its
stands for is also an Israeli government objective.

As a result, victory in its most immediate sense means for Palestinians
to succeed at standing steadfast and preventing Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon from achieving these objectives. That means only that
Palestinians must maintain the three and a half million Palestinians
currently living in their homeland, stick to the same political
positions and ensure the survival of the same leadership that continues
to advocate a political stand based on the stipulations of the relevant
United Nations Security Council Resolutions.

Based on these criteria, there is no feeling of defeat among
Palestinians, with the exception of some intellectuals who feel that
these goals represent the lowest common denominator of strategic
planning or that Palestinians are not meeting even these.

The very important other side to this, and another aspect of the
confrontation, was represented by the victory achieved by Sharon in his
last visit to Washington, which generated deep feelings of hopelessness
among Palestinians. Sharon managed to get the president of the United
States to suspend international law, predetermine the outcome of the
serious final status issues, and encourage and legitimize Israel's
settlement policy, all of which will help to bring about Sharon's
political and ideological goals.

But Palestinians feel that time is on their side. If Israel accepts a
solution based on international legitimacy, then this will certainly
constitute a victory. But if Israel continues to prevent a Palestinian
state along the borders of 1967, then Israel will face a more
problematic future, including a developing apartheid situation and what
it argues is the growing demographic "threat" of the Palestinian
population.

Speaking practically, the only feasible victory for Palestinians is that
which is a victory for Israel and the only feasible victory for Israel
is that which is a victory for Palestinians. Nor is that impossible
according to the declared objectives of the two sides. Ending
occupation, bringing about independence and solving the refugee problem
are not incompatible with lasting and comprehensive peace and security
for everyone, as well as regional integration and economic prosperity.
In fact, these two sets of objectives complement each other. Now we need
to get back on track and bring them all to fruition.

