In spite of the fact that the current upheaval enveloping the
Palestinian political regime seems to reflect a failure to enforce law
and order, there are other deep roots of the situation. The crisis is,
in fact, a repetition of other, similar crises that took place eight
months ago after the resignation of then-Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas
(Abu Mazen).

This predicament has both political and economic causes. The political
cause is simply a result of differences among components of the
Palestinian elite on how to respond to the possible political
developments resulting from Israel's unilateral disengagement project.
The mainstream of the Palestinian leadership is cautious vis-a-vis this
project and wants to avoid neutralizing the Gaza Strip and disengaging
it from the West Bank. Others seem to feel differently and for that
reason may be trying to create instability in order to weaken the
leadership and Authority.

Because of the fragile situation caused by economic difficulties to
which the Palestinian people and Authority have been subject, creating
instability in the Palestinian Authority is relatively easy.
Unemployment, which has ranged from one-third to one-half of the
Palestinian labor force during this intifada, has increased poverty to
two-thirds of the Palestinian people and leaves the Palestinian
Authority and government very vulnerable to criticisms and complaints by
the public. In addition, Israel's systematic efforts to reoccupy the
Palestinian territories, by--among other things--crippling the
Palestinian security forces in order to blame them for not fulfilling
their obligations, has also made the Palestinian Authority fragile
vis-a-vis the Palestinian people and different political groups.

Against this backdrop of weakness, which was caused intentionally by
Israel, the developments in Gaza can be better understood. In this
context, it becomes relatively easy for any group or political element
to cause instability, especially in Gaza. The Gaza kidnappings happened
in the course of Israel's attempt to pressure the Palestinian political
leadership to be more cooperative with the political proposals that it
is unilaterally presenting.

The members of the Palestinian cabinet, and particularly Prime Minister
Ahmad Qurei (Abu Ala), find themselves in an awkward situation, as
explained in his letter of resignation. The first concern is the
inability to deal with the economic crisis and the public's continued
blaming of the Palestinian cabinet for not being able to solve the
economic problems, especially unemployment. What aggravates this problem
is the decline in financial support coming from Arab and international
donors to the Palestinian Authority. The second concern is the inability
to enforce law and order, and the third is the political deadlock with
Israel.

In spite of the seriousness of this crisis, it is a manageable crisis
that can be contained by the different Palestinian groups and tendencies
within the framework of the Palestinian political leadership. How can we
be so sure? Simply because the Israeli offers creating these different
reactions are not generous enough to justify this internal
division.

