Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is maneuvering to establish a
broader-based government in order to proceed with disengagement from the
Gaza Strip. The alternatives to such a government appear to be either
new elections or a right-religious coalition under Binyamin Netanyahu.

Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmad Qurei (Abu Ala) tendered his
resignation against the backdrop of growing anarchy in the Gaza Strip.
In the Palestinian case, there is no clear alternative to the present
government--other than more anarchy.

The obvious connection between the two governmental crises is the advent
of Sharon's disengagement plan. In the Israeli case, Sharon's
center-right coalition collapsed over the issue; his challenge is to put
together a pro-disengagement coalition with a comfortable majority,
despite the reservations of many in his own Likud party concerning both
disengagement and the entry of the Labor party into the coalition.

In the Palestinian case, the prospect of Israel's departure beginning in
March 2005 has further destabilized an already chaotic situation in the
Gaza Strip. Local power brokers there vie for control by means of
violent demonstrations, abductions, and elections to Fatah branches. The
authority of Qurei and his superior, Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat,
is being challenged and eroded.

In a broader sense, Sharon is following in the footsteps of all his
predecessors since the late 1980s--Shamir, Rabin/Peres, Netanyahu, and
Barak--each of whom was eventually unable to remain in office because
the Israeli-Palestinian conflict/peace process destabilized the
coalition. And while Qurei in his resignation statement did cite the
economy alongside anarchy and the absence of a peace process as reasons
for his intention to leave office, clearly in the Palestinian case too
the cause is the conflict and its ramifications.

In Israel, the split in public opinion over the Palestinian issue finds
expression in an orderly parliamentary procedure that follows
constitutional rules. While that procedure is flawed and problematic and
has thus far proven incapable of delivering on a peaceful resolution, it
remains better than all the alternatives. In this regard the greatest
threat to disengagement is the intention of extremists among the
ideological settler minority to bypass the democratic process, while the
lesser threat is the built-in constraint within the Israeli system that
allows a highly energized political minority like the settlers to delay
or even disable the process.

In contrast, Palestinians in their current dilemma have nothing by way
of democratic precedent and little in terms of democratic practice to
fall back on. They have Arafat, and he is increasingly understood, even
by them, to be part of the problem rather than the solution. While some
of Sharon's policies of the past three years have undoubtedly
deliberately destabilized Palestine--Israel's prime minister seemingly
does not believe in genuine peace with our Arab neighbors--at this
juncture the Palestinians have only themselves to blame. The dynamic in
Gaza is liable increasingly to resemble Lebanon, or even Somalia; that
would be disastrous for the entire region.

One way or another, the interaction between Israeli-Palestinian peace
and the functioning or malfunctioning of democracy in both countries
could not be more obvious. While the conventional wisdom of the Bush
administration and many on the Israeli right holds that
democracy--Palestinian, Iraqi--must precede peace and stability, this
appears to be a luxury we in Israel are increasingly unable to afford.
On the contrary, Israeli-Palestinian peace, or even far-reaching
unilateral separation initiated by Israel, could have the beneficial
effect on Israeli democracy of finally removing or at least minimizing a
divisive political issue that has been stymieing the system for nearly
two decades.

On the Palestinian side, the problems are more complex; there are no
political precedents for linking greater democracy with peace, or vice
versa. There has been one democratic election, in January 1996, followed
to a large extent by paralysis, corruption, and a culture of violence.
Now the mere threat of Israeli withdrawal has further exacerbated
instability.

Yet there are many democratically minded people in Palestine who see in
Israeli withdrawal an opportunity for Palestinians to place their
country back on the road to peace and democracy. We can only hope that
eventually they will have the upper hand.

