Q: If it is said that Palestinians and Israelis are engaged
in a war, how then will Palestinians know that they have achieved victory?

A: We, the Palestinians, have been engaged in a war that the
Zionists have imposed upon us ever since 1948 when they left their
countries to occupy ours--from that time, they imposed the war on
themselves.

By their crime of occupying Palestine, they have caused and created
suffering for Palestinians for 56 years. In those years, they
slaughtered dozens of thousands of Palestinians aggressively and
unjustly, and exiled millions of them from their original lands and
properties. The exiled are still looking forward to returning to their
lands, cities, villages and houses. The Zionists also imprisoned dozens
of thousands of Palestinians; 7,000 of them remain imprisoned today.

The Zionists continue destroying our lives for no reason but that we
demand our legitimate rights and because we fight to put an end to the
tragedy and multi-faceted suffering of our people. Therefore, we think
that if the suffering of the Palestinians stops we have achieved victory.

Q: Are there different levels of victory, or will only a
complete victory be enough?

A: Of course there are different levels of victory, whereas
sometimes you can win by executing a plan to push Israeli tanks away as
they invade any area in our country--because at that time, you would
protect our children from being slaughtered by the Zionists.
Accordingly, that is a victory.

Also, when we force the enemy to leave any piece of our land without
giving up any of our legitimate rights as a price for that, we consider
this victory.

We might also win a round of confrontation or win the media war, thus
producing a victory in this expanding war. All of the things I have
mentioned are partial, field or periodic victories, but the perfect and
complete victory that Palestinians seek is that which can put an end to
their suffering, and achieved by regaining all of their comprehensive
and complete stolen rights.

Q: How does Islam define victory and is this important in
the Palestinian context?

A: In Islam, there is no specific definition of victory.
Muslims' concept of victory is the same as others'. How did the French
understand it when the Nazis occupied their lands' Or the Algerians,
when the French occupied their lands' The Vietnamese? Or even the
Americans themselves?

All of [these people] are still celebrating the anniversary of the date
that they pushed back the invaders or occupiers of their lands and
liberated their lands, accordingly ridding themselves of the slavery and
humiliation practiced by their occupiers. We as Muslims taste victory
the same way they did.

Therefore, I don't think that there is any misunderstanding between the
Palestinian factions, national or Islamic, about the definition of
victory; we all have the same concept of victory.

Q: Has the Palestinian definition of victory changed in the
last 50 years?

A: I think that the majority of Palestinians have the same
concept and definition of victory from 50 years ago, otherwise they
would have accepted all what has been offered them from 1948 until
today. [By this], I mean solutions that detract from their rights and
international resolutions, peace initiatives or signed agreements.

Some might say that the Palestinians have missed many opportunities, but
the fact is that they rejected defeat. Or we might say that they were
and are still seeking victory.

It is obvious that Palestinians still want and insist on regaining their
comprehensive and complete rights. They have consciously refused any
solution that detracts from their national and legitimate rights. The
Palestinians also have defended this decision strongly and paid a
precious price for that. [They have] sacrificed and are still
sacrificing because Palestinians understand that victory means
liberating the entire land.

Q: Is it possible that Palestinians might win the battle
with Israel but lose the battle within their own society?

A: I don't think it is possible, because Palestinians cannot win
the battle with the enemy unless they are able to win it within their
society after defeating the enemy.

Look at the deep significance of verses 40 and 41 from Surat al Hajj
(which is Sura 22 in the Holy Quran). In this verse, Allah says that
those who win rule themselves after they defeat their enemy, because the
people that are controlled by various groups that fight each other as
they fight the enemy cannot achieve victory. And if one day any one
people achieves victory, it will be due to their national triumph. If
they were unified during the battle, then they will be able to protect
and maintain their unity after achieving victory. Allah said this in his
Holy Quran, Surat al Anfal verse 46 and Surat al Assaf, verse 4.

Q: Do you believe that you will see victory in your lifetime?

A: I hope so, but I don't know when I will die, therefore, I
can't be certain that I will see it, or that I will not.

But I want to remind you that the enemy's might does not distance or
prevent the possibility of achieving victory. So many unjust countries
have collapsed while at their strongest. This is what happened to
Germany, to the former Soviet Union. It would not be strange for the
Zionist entity and the United States of America to collapse while they
are strong.

I think that the strong will of Palestinian youth is mightier than that
of the Zionist soldier by thousands of times. The battle itself has
never been one only of weapons because if that were so, the Zionists
would have conquered the Palestinian people by practicing their various
kinds of destruction and terror against the Palestinians. If that were
the case, [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon would have been able to
destroy the intifada and the Palestinian resistance in 100 days, as he
promised.

