Since its assumption of power, this Israeli government has made the
Palestinian Authority (PA) its main political and security target. From
the start, most Israeli violent activities against the Palestinian side
have been directed at Palestinian Authority individuals or buildings.
Equally, the PA has been the target of Israeli diplomatic, political and
media offensives.

The Palestinian Authority, notably different from the Palestinian
leadership, is an administrative bureaucratic body that was designed and
agreed upon in the negotiations commenced in Oslo. It was officially
born as part of these signed agreements. Its tenure was to be for five
years, the same time period of the interim agreement that was to be
followed by a final status arrangement negotiated and agreed upon by
both sides during the interim period. As such, from a Palestinian
perspective, the PA is overdue and connected in Palestinian public
thinking with the Oslo agreement, which is becoming less and less popular.

The Palestinian Authority, however, is a political necessity for
continuing the peace process and maintaining whatever positive
developments were brought to the relationship between the two sides
during, and as a result of, the peace process.

The Palestinian Authority is now shielding itself from vicious criticism
and attack on the inside and externally. Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon has been very vigorous and vocal in attempting to undermine the
role, credibility, and even the existence of the Palestinian Authority.
This appears to stem from ideological, dogmatic causes, rather than
political and pragmatic ones. The Palestinian Authority and the areas of
the occupied territories under Palestinian control are the particular
products of the Oslo agreement that Sharon tried hard to prevent as
leader of the Israeli opposition. The reason is that these two
developments have the potential of developing towards an end to the
Israeli occupation and the establishment of a Palestinian entity, and
eventually, a state. These all run contradictory to Sharon's ideology,
which considers these territories a part of Eretz Israel.

Internally, and as a result of the failure of the peace process that
produced it, the Palestinian Authority is under fire from more than one
direction in Palestinian society. Those who have been consistently
against the PA and Oslo are using their political failure to suggest
that the Palestinian Authority is no longer necessary and that the
Palestinian people should either go back to previous bodies of political
leadership, such as the Palestine Liberation Organization, or come up
with new political bodies, like a national unity government or emergency
government or other such creation. All these proposals share the
component that the concept of the Palestinian Authority be abandoned.

Others, in particular Intifada activists, feel that this Palestinian
Authority is a burden and a source of weakness in the confrontational
relationship with Israel. Even some of those who have been very loyal to
the PA and benefited from it a great deal seem to be trying to jump from
the sinking boat.

One cannot ignore the public's experience of the Palestinian Authority's
poor performance and abysmal record, whether in human rights,
institution building, enforcing law and order or tackling corruption.
All of these have contributed very negatively to the public's
willingness to continue to support or defend the PA right now, when both
its friends and foes seem to be trying to get rid of it.

Ironically, the Arab states, the European states and the United States
are those most enthusiastic about keeping the Palestinian Authority
alive. This is why, for example, the Arab League has decided to
financially rescue the Authority by extending all needed financial
support. Recently, the European Union also seems to be agreeing to
support the Palestinian Authority's deficit.

It appears, then, that the Palestinian Authority is relevant only in as
much as there is a possibility of ending confrontations between
Palestinians and Israelis and going back to trying to resuscitate this
particular peace process, one restricted by the Oslo agreements.
Certainly from the point of view of those Palestinians and Israelis who
have no interest in any peace process, or faith in this peace process in
particular, the PA has little relevance today.

