The argument that wars have not broken out between democracies has
proven correct thus far. The argument that it is better to make peace
with democratic countries is also true: a democratic country is
obligated to its agreements, each new government continues where its
predecessor left off, and it makes decisions on the basis of broad
support--unlike some small clique that takes power and whose commitments
become irrelevant the moment a different faction takes over the country
in its stead.

These arguments have led figures like Natan Sharansky and Binyamin
Netanyahu to assert that democratic Israel cannot make peace with the
non-democratic Arab countries, and that it must wait until these
countries are democratic before it signs peace treaties with them.
Alternatively, as long as these states do not change their regimes,
Israel must demand wide security margins in making peace with them--so
wide that these countries will apparently be prevented from making peace
with us.

While in Israel this concept has not been universally accepted, the
United States, and particularly the Bush administration, has proven
receptive to these arguments: the cause of democratization plays a
central role in the American effort to advance the peace process in the
region. Any expression of reservation regarding this new approach is
liable to be interpreted as a reservation about democracy and, god
forbid, as support for reactionary regimes.

The truth is that those Israelis who raise the issue of democracy with
our neighbors as a precondition for any peace agreement are not exactly
waiting for the moment when an appropriate Palestinian partner will
appear in order to deliver over the West Bank and Gaza Strip and rid
ourselves of a 36-year-old occupation and the heavy demographic burden
that comes with it. These are right wingers who are convinced that time
is working in Israel's favor, who understand full well that the Arab
world will not become democratic in the near future, and who are
prepared to wait even for several generations until the neighboring
regimes change, because they are not prepared to pay the price of peace.

The real question that confronts us is not whether it is preferable to
reach peace agreements with democratic neighbors, but whether it is
right for Israel to wait for additional decades until this happens.
Doesn't the fact that in 2010 there will be more Palestinians than Jews
west of the Jordan River mandate an agreement at an earlier stage? Can
Israel maintain the burden of the occupation and the allocation of its
resources for the occupied territories for many more decades? Is
continuous war the situation in which we want to raise our children and
grandchildren instead of living normal lives like most countries?

Anyone answering in the negative has to conclude that peace will be made
with the Palestinians, the Syrians and the Lebanese when we find the
right balance between the national interests of the various parties,
regardless of the nature of their regimes. Perhaps wars have not broken
out between democracies, but peace treaties and other agreements have
been made between democratic and non-democratic countries (even between
Israel and Egypt and Jordan) without anyone feeling the need to demand a
regime change before adding his signature. Regional peace is likely to
accelerate the processes of democratization, and it is more likely that
this will happen than that Middle East regimes will soon become
democratic and thereby set the scene for peace agreements with Israel.

America's efforts to advance democracy in the region are worthy of our
admiration and our assistance. We recall that similar attempts were made
by the West in Egypt, Syria and other Arab countries in the 1930s and
1940s. These were far-reaching efforts, applied to a largely illiterate
population, and they failed. The next attempt should be made cautiously,
bearing in mind what happened in Algeria a few years ago when Islamic
radical elements exploited the new regime for their own dark purposes.

