Q: In your view, what prompted the kidnappings in the Gaza
Strip?

A: First of all, using arms against others for political purposes
is a very bad development in Palestinian internal relations. Causing
problems in Gaza now is not helpful for the Palestinians, even though
internal pressure for reforms in the Palestinian Authority is necessary.
These events took place because there is conflict between those in power
now and those who want more power in the Authority in general and in
security agencies in particular. It is not an issue of security reforms
but of who is in power.

Q: Why did Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmad Qurei (Abu Ala)
tender his resignation now, after Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat
finally agreed with him to restructure the security forces?

A: I think it was a mistake to tender his resignation before
giving the present government a chance to stop the conflict in Gaza. But
in general Abu Ala thinks he cannot continue like this because of the
government's lack of power, especially on security, which is controlled
by Arafat. The resignation of the government now will not support
reforms but will cause difficulties for all Palestinian goals. The
Israeli contention that there is no Palestinian negotiating partner will
be reinforced by this situation. The Israelis will continue their
escalation in the Gaza Strip and West Bank, using the lack of a prime
minister as an excuse not to talk to the Palestinians. At the same time,
the PA's difficulties with the United States will resume, since this
crisis seems to confirm US complaints about the Palestinian Authority.

If the government can succeed in its role by asking the Palestinian
masses to help stop this dangerous development, it can justify its place
in the Palestinian system. So this is a test for the Palestinian system.
If the PA can get control of the security situation, it will become more
powerful than before. If, on the other hand, the government resigns or
does nothing, the public judgment will be negative.

Q: What is the connection, if any, between the Palestinian
government's collapse and the Israeli government's search for a
coalition with Labor?

A: The connection is indirect, not direct. I think a coalition
government in Israel would strengthen Sharon's plan and add impetus to
the Palestinians' demands for more power in their government. Under a
coalition, Sharon's plan would be implemented faster. The PA's role is
being tested. If the PA has clear duties related to the disengagement
plan, especially for negotiations and security, it can continue working
with Egypt and others to manage Sharon's plan.

There are different positions among Palestinian groups regarding
Sharon's plan. The majority thinks we should not negotiate on the basis
of Sharon's plan and we should go back to the roadmap or the United
Nations. Sharon's plan is now different from what he gave to Bush and
what the Israelis have talked about with the Egyptians. None of the
Palestinians knows exactly what Sharon's plan is, but in general the
majority of Palestinians thinks this is a Sharon maneuver to create more
difficulties and that in the end Israel will not leave the Gaza Strip.
Abu Ala cannot continue working for political mobilization without a
united Palestinian concept on the Egyptian initiative and Sharon's plan.

Any initiative, even the Egyptian initiative, has a duty to clarify the
Israeli government's disengagement plan and the plan's relationship to
the wall and to withdrawal from PA territory, which is necessary for PA
elections to take place before March 2005. The PA has to think about the
new developments in Israel. Some Palestinians think a coalition
government in Israel will be worse for us; others think it will move
something and bring us back to the roadmap. I don't think that Sharon
and Likud will change their plans; Labor will accept Likud ideas, not
vice versa.

Q: In the Israeli case, the dismissal of corruption charges
against Sharon has made a coalition with Labor possible for the first
time. What effect do ongoing charges of corruption against Arafat and
other PA officials have on Palestinian coalition building?

A: In Israel, even though there is not a complete legal case
against Sharon, the majority thinks that Sharon has a relationship with
corruption. Corruption in the Israeli political system is clear in many
ways and with different ministers or former ministers. On the
Palestinian side, there are many issues of corruption in addition to the
main issue of how to stop Israeli aggression and the wall, which has
damaged all the Palestinian areas.

Palestinians think they will not be successful against Israeli
aggression without deep reform in their own political system. PA
corruption should stop, and we should go to the UN to make Israel
withdraw from PA territory so that we can hold elections under UN
supervision. Even if in Israel they manage with their corruption, we
cannot manage ours, because it means that the occupation will continue.
With elections, we can stop corruption and other abuses of the
democratic system. The legislative council is now discussing changing
the electoral system. Hopefully this will result in a more democratic
system.

Q: How will this crisis affect the Palestinian government
and agenda in the long term?

A: For the Palestinians, the first priority now is to stop this
crisis. The second is to disarm armed groups and implement reforms of
the security agencies, so that only trained professionals work in these
areas. We also need to address social and economic priorities, stop
corruption, and rebuild the damaged institutions of the PA and Palestine
Liberation Organization.

