Q: What do you think of the recent discussions between
the Palestinian factions of Fateh and Hamas and the papers drawn up
declaring a ceasefire and a unified leadership?

A: I have seen the papers of all the leaderships and the paper of
Hamas itself and I have spoken much with the members of Hamas who are
involved in the drafting of this paper. I think that Hamas still
believes in the right to fight against Israel's occupation. Hamas
believes that Israel is occupying all of Palestine and Hamas is still
against signing on to the borders of 1967--the borders of the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank and Jerusalem.

In general, what is written in the paper is understood by everyone in
their own way and I do not think that the paper will put restraints or
borders on any group in fighting the occupation. Many of them still
believe that Israel will not respect any agreement and will continue the
assassinations and the demolition of homes and the killings of
Palestinians. There is no ceasefire, but there is some placing of a
system on fighting the occupation.

Q: Hamas has rejected the initiative. Why?

A: No one can give guarantees that Israel will agree to an end of
the occupation and they [Hamas] told the other factions frankly that you
cannot give Israel a free ticket, where they get everything and we get
nothing. How can you offer something good to Israel now, when we have
received nothing in these negotiations? For now, let us stay away from
putting our final signature [on the agreement], Hamas said. I think that
some of the faction leaders have been convinced by the ideas of Hamas.

Hamas has become very rigid on this point, in fact, and I talked with
[Hamas political leader Abdel Aziz] Rantisi about this and he said very
clearly that "we do not recognize the 1967 borders at a time when Israel
is killing Palestinians in the heart of Nablus and other Palestinian
towns." At the same time, I don't think that the Palestinian Authority
cares much about this. Now they have reached their own agreement, the
"Gaza and Bethlehem first" plan. It is part of the policy of
[Palestinian President Yasser Arafat] that he does not care too much
about the opposition, and will continue to run the negotiations with
Israel as he likes.

Q: Hamas has always said that it will never be the cause
of a Palestinian civil war. But by continuing to carry out attacks
inside the Green Line, Hamas makes the Palestinian Authority and Fateh
look weak. In a way, it defeats them without a civil war.

A: I think that any time Hamas feels a danger of this, it knows when
to ease the situation. Now we have had three weeks without suicide
bombings--even Israel says that the situation is very quiet. I think
there is an open channel between Hamas and the Palestinian leadership
and it is not so difficult for them to reach a compromise [before civil
war breaks out]. Everyone believes that civil war means the destruction
of Palestinian society.

Q: What would be the conditions under which Hamas would
be willing to lay down arms against Israel? Or inside the Green Line?

A: Hamas does not reject the idea of a Palestinian state in the West
Bank and Gaza, but [Hamas spiritual leader] Sheikh Yassin always says
that we cannot forget the rest of Palestine and that the majority of
Palestinians are refugees who have the right to return to their homes.
Hamas still believes that there is no way to give up on the rest of
Palestine--but maybe it can accept a Palestinian state in the West Bank
and Gaza as a temporary solution.

