On January 8, Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei (Abu Ala) voiced
his "private opinion" to the effect that Israel's fence and settlement
policies constitute "an apartheid solution to put the Palestinians in
cantons. . . . We will go for a one state solution in which the
Palestinians have the same rights as Israelis." Three days later,
following a reminder by the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO)
leadership that the movement's objective remained a Palestinian (and not
a binational) state, Abu Ala effectively retracted his remark by
stating: "The Palestinian Authority adheres to the idea of a viable two
state solution."

It is tempting for Israelis to dismiss the Palestinian prime minister's
first remark as a mindless slip of the tongue. Certainly it is
instructive to note the knee jerk reaction of the PLO leadership,
hastily reaffirming the two state solution. The fact is that Abu Ala's
remark did not precipitate a landslide Palestinian movement toward
abandoning that strategy.

But it was significant. It constituted the first time since 1988, when
the PLO officially adopted the two state solution, that a mainstream
Palestinian leader involved in negotiations with Israel--indeed, the man
who personally negotiated the Oslo accords--cast doubt on that position.
Nor was Abu Ala whistling in the dark: more and more Palestinian
intellectuals have, in recent months, echoed the same sentiment, some of
them in these virtual pages of bitterlemons.org.

Abu Ala is right: the fence (as hijacked by Sharon for political
purposes) and the settlements are indeed liable to create an
apartheid-like situation. He also knows, as do we all, that the
Palestinians will soon constitute a majority of the population under
direct and indirect Israeli rule between the Jordan River and the
Mediterranean Sea, thereby fulfilling an additional condition for
comparisons to pre-1994 South Africa. His remark could indeed possibly
be a harbinger of an eventual PLO decision to reject the two state
solution as no longer viable, and to adopt an updated version of its
pre-1988 position advocating a single state solution.

Why, then, did Abu Ala's fellow PLO leaders hasten to reject his remark
and force a retraction? The answer appears to lie in the revolutionary
nature of the consequences of abandoning the two state solution. Even
assuming that PLO chairman Yasser Arafat's real objective is to
"Palestinize" and delegitimize Israel from within in the course of a
process that does not truly reflect Palestinian acceptance of the Jewish
state, that strategy is nevertheless based on a two state solution. In
contrast, the logical corollary of the prime minister's "private"
position is the dissolution of the Palestinian Authority and the return
of full Israeli rule, military or civilian, under which the Palestinians
would commence a campaign for "one man, one vote."

This means that, from Yasser Arafat on down, more than 100,000
ministers, clerks, officials, and security personnel would be out of a
job. In the eyes of the international community that has recognized the
Oslo process and the roadmap, it would be the PLO that officially backed
out of these two-state arrangements. All eyes would now focus on the
capacity of the Palestinian national movement to galvanize the
Palestinian people, the international community, the surrounding Arab
states, and a majority of Israeli voters behind the new cause. Would
they succeed? How long would the struggle take? Meanwhile the conflict
would get worse, not better.

Adopting a one-state strategy, then, is an immense undertaking; a huge
gamble. It risks sizeable Palestinian and Arab vested interests. It
could prolong and escalate the conflict considerably, necessarily
involving the Arab citizens of Israel (since under this strategy the
green line loses its significance) and the surrounding Arab countries as
well. It is not a decision to be made lightly by the Palestinians.

Some on the Israeli left and in Palestine believe that it is still
possible to negotiate our way out of this mess with the Palestinians.
But they appear to have little political clout on either side. Perhaps
more significantly, a few actors on the ruling Israeli political right
have begun to understand the dilemma and now advocate unilateral
withdrawal precisely in order to avoid a demographic-political disaster.
But three key conditions for their success are still missing.

First, this pragmatic new right does not yet acknowledge the need to
leave open the door for future political negotiations with the
Palestinians over areas not abandoned by Israel, such as the Jordan
Valley and greater Jerusalem, and to restore the fence to its original,
green line security location--in other words, to depoliticize any
Israeli unilateral moves. Secondly, there appear to be no leader and no
political coalition on the Israeli political horizon that could confront
the settlers and physically remove them. And third, Washington has not
yet become convinced of the necessity and utility of such a move.

Abu Ala pointed to the inevitable and tragic outcome of the current
geographic, demographic and political direction that both sides are
moving in. His remark may have crossed not only the green line, but an
important red line as well.

