The recent statement made by Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei
concerning a binational state and resulting in such an uproar was not
only a response to developments in Israeli-Palestinian relations, but
also a response to growing debate inside Palestinian society and among
various Palestinian political tendencies.

But before exploring the reasons for the statement, it is important to
first clarify any misunderstanding. While many interpreted Qurei's
comments to be an expression of support for a binational state, this was
not at all the context of his statement. Qurei was only intending to
warn Israelis and the international community that if Israel's
settlement expansion policy continues on its current trajectory, it will
remove in practice the possibility for an independent Palestinian state
and with it a solution based on two states; thus Palestinians would have
only one remaining option to achieve their rights as equal citizens of a
country: the one state solution. Qurei's warning stemmed, then, from his
commitment to the two state solution, which remains the official
position of the Palestinian people and their leadership.

Indeed, the binational state is not a solution. On the one hand, it
contradicts a key element of Israel's objectives, i.e., to have a Jewish
state, and on the other it contradicts a fundamental Palestinian goal,
which is to have a state of their own. That is why this option has never
been promoted by the Palestinian leadership and will never be its chosen
policy. It could, however, be the practical outcome of current Israeli
practices in the occupied territories, the wall and settlement
expansion, which are delaying the establishment of a Palestinian state
and making its prospects dimmer by the day. These changes happening
right under our nose will likely be irreversible: as the saying goes, a
ton of regret never made an ounce of difference.

Inside the Palestinian territories, there has been a very vigorous
debate on whether or not the Palestinian Authority should be maintained
or dismantled. In the perception of Palestinians, the Palestinian
Authority, as it was established through the Oslo accords, was the
nucleus and initial stage of the independent Palestinian state in the
Gaza Strip and West Bank, including East Jerusalem. Now, a growing
number of Palestinians are suggesting that because Israel insists on
narrowing the physical boundaries of the Palestinian Authority and
leaving it with no authority to speak of, this authority might
eventually become a "middleman" for the Israeli occupation in the
territories. These people are suggesting that, either this authority be
ensured the prospect of developing into an actual state, or that it be
disbanded and Israel forced to carry the full burden of occupation with
no facade of a Palestinian companion. This step would also force Israel
to face the consequences of shrinking the Palestinian dream of
statehood, an outcome that will harm Palestinians but will also do great
damage to Israelis.

The shortsighted right wing government of Israel, driven by ideological
motives, is leading the two sides towards strategic options that are
different from those that have characterized the conflict for decades.
And once we reach that point, everyone is going to regret it dearly, in
particular those who dreamed of peace and coexistence, because a viable
Palestinian state alongside Israel is the prerequisite for a
comprehensive, stable and lasting peace in the Middle East.

