A discussion of the ongoing significance of the Palestinian Authority
(PA) for Israel has to address two key problems. The first is the
difficulty in predicting what, if any, Palestinian leadership structure
might conceivably replace it. The second is distinguishing, under
present circumstances, between the fate of PA Rais Yasir Arafat, and the
fate of the PA? Does Arafat's disappearance from the scene necessarily
mean the collapse of the PA?

There is a school of thought in the Israeli security establishment that
argues that, were Arafat to disappear today, he would be replaced by a
coalition of moderate Fatah pragmatists. Thus the PA would continue to
exist, but it would be easier for Israel to deal with. Needless to say,
this assessment creates a huge temptation for the Sharon government and
for anyone else in Israel who is frustrated with Arafat's lack of
credibility, his reliance on violence and his extreme positions (even by
the standards of Israeli doves) regarding the Right of Return and the
Temple Mount/Haram al-Sharif.

A more sober and measured assessment must conclude that there are so
many potential variables involved in a Palestinian regime
change--Palestinian political and military infighting, manipulations by
Israel, Egypt and Jordan, possible physical conquest and reoccupation by
Israel, communications difficulties caused by the geographic
non-contiguity of the various segments of the PA--that the outcome is
impossible to predict. One can easily speculate that the removal or
disappearance of Arafat and/or the PA will usher in an era of chaos and
anarchy, and possibly an Islamist regime led by Hamas. These outcomes
are at least as likely as a peaceful 'succession' by moderates. An
Islamist regime in Palestine would be the first in the entire region. It
would be sitting on Israel's borders. How ironic that this might happen
at the very time when the US is fighting the extremist violence embedded
in another radical Islam, and is begging Israelis and Palestinians to
get their conflict 'off the radar screen' in order to avoid hindering
American coalition-building efforts.

Some on the Israeli political right claim to welcome the advent of an
extremist Palestinian leadership, insofar as it puts an end to a
territorial peace process they loath, and draws clear lines between
"civilized" Israel and its Palestinian neighbor. In fact, the emergence
of a Palestinian Islamist regime openly dedicated to Israel's
destruction would be a recipe for yet more violence, destruction and
misery for both Israelis and Palestinians. It would make Arafat and
Fatah look positively benign by comparison. Israel's settlement and
occupation policies would be universally blamed for such a development.

The chain of events triggered by the disappearance of Arafat and/or the
PA could also conceivably precipitate full-fledged Israeli reoccupation
of all of Areas A, B and the Gaza Strip. But since even the Sharon
government recognizes that it has no 'solution' for dealing with 3.2
million Palestinians under total Israeli rule, it would presumably do
everything possible to find an alternative.

The PA could conceivably collapse on its own-due to the corruption and
weakness of leadership that a number of Palestinian scholars and critics
point to. But it is within Israel's power to help it survive or help it
fall. There are growing indications that Sharon would like to help it
fall. Each new incursion into Area A appears designed to accustom
Washington, Cairo and Amman, as well as the Israeli public, to the
ultimate coup de grace. Sharon has already hinted publicly that he
prefers to negotiate with Palestinian regional security chiefs rather
than with Arafat, who no longer inspires trust among most Israelis. And
Sharon has a record of disastrous manipulations within the power
structure of Israel's Arab neighbors: his "Jordan is Palestine" formula
to replace the Hashemite regime; the abortive Village Leagues twenty
years ago, and the "crowning" of the Jumayil brothers in Lebanon in
1982-83. Most Israelis learned from the Lebanon experience that it is
counterproductive to Israeli interests, in terms of security and
regional relations, to meddle in the leadership arrangements of our
neighbors.

There is undoubtedly a measure of truth to the contention, heard in both
Israel and Palestine, that the Fatah "Old Guard" represented by Arafat
is growing increasingly irrelevant and out of touch. For the moment, the
best option for stabilization and a return to the peace process is still
for Yasir Arafat to abandon violence and restore his authority. But if
his rule is to be replaced or radically altered, then it would be better
for both Palestinians and Israelis if this were accomplished from
within, at the initiative of Palestinians only. And better for
Palestinians to maintain the ongoing functioning of existing PA
institutions, however problematic they are and however temporary they
are designed to be, until ultimately they can negotiate the evolution of
a Palestinian state through agreement. At that point, of course, the
Palestinian Authority would and should in any case cease to
exist.

