Since the outbreak of the Intifada nearly two years ago, groups on both
sides of the Israeli-Palestinian divide have been involved in attempts
to organize some sort of ceasefire. Recently these initiatives appear to
be accelerating and proliferating. One effort is unilateral; others
involve both sides working together. Some are drafted in codes that are
difficult for many outsiders to decipher. Others look simply naive. Yet
taken together, they cannot be ignored.

The unilateral initiative, much talked about in recent weeks, is
understood by Israelis to have commenced with an attempt among
Palestinians at the "field level" of Tanzim, along with leaders from
Hamas and other organizations and with European Union assistance, to
declare a ceasefire. It was interrupted briefly, but not stopped, by the
Israeli assassination of Salah Shehadeh in Gaza in late July. More
recently it apparently involves an attempt to draft a new, general
document of understanding between the PLO and Hamas outlining the
current aims of the Palestinian resistance and the means to be adopted
in pursuing them. It proposes the formation of a unified command that
appears to reflect discontent with the current Palestinian leadership.

From the Israeli standpoint, the disturbing part of this otherwise
interesting exercise in self-reform is that the unilateral ceasefire
being discussed is actually not mentioned explicitly in the document,
and in any event is only partial: Hamas, according to reports, would, if
it agreed, be permitted to attack Israelis in the West Bank and Gaza but
not inside Israel. This is reminiscent of an earlier Fatah-Hamas
agreement reached in Cairo in December 1995, which allegedly permitted
Hamas to carry out suicide bombings only in areas outside Palestinian
Authority control, i.e., only inside Israel. In other words, seven years
ago it was convenient for Arafat and the PA to allow violence to
continue outside the West Bank and Gaza. Now, for a variety of political
and tactical reasons involving Israeli reoccupation and the Israeli
reaction to suicide bombings, the opposite is the case: violence is okay
inside the West Bank and Gaza, but not inside Israel.

This effort does not appear to reflect any sort of comprehensive
strategic recognition on the part of Palestinians that violence will not
advance their political goals; rather, the attitude toward a ceasefire
is selective and tactical.

A second effort ostensibly does better. Initiated by Israeli Defense
Minister Ben Eliezer--it is known as "Gaza and Bethlehem first." It
calls for a gradual takeover of security control by Palestinian forces,
first in Gaza and the southern West Bank, followed by Israeli withdrawal
from parts of Area A it has reoccupied. It is based on an assessment
that Palestinians are indeed suffering from war fatigue and wish to
abandon violence, i.e., that Israel has "won" the war in the sense of
persuading most Palestinian leaders to accept a ceasefire that offers no
concrete political payoff beyond Israeli withdrawal to positions held
prior to the Intifada.

This initiative is problematic from two standpoints. First, there is no
Israeli commitment that, once quiet is restored, realistic political
negotiations will be resumed: not over Sharon's
a-state-in-50-percent-of-the-West-Bank-plan, but rather over something
like the Saudi/Clinton plans. Hence even the best of ceasefires is not
likely to last. Secondly, it is still not clear that Palestinian
security commanders have fully internalized the need to reconstitute
their security forces so that they dedicate themselves to preventing
Palestinian terrorism. Too many Palestinian "reformers" understand the
rebuilding of a security force as intended to more effectively oppose
Israeli incursions rather than to stamp out terrorism. And Hamas and
Islamic Jihad reject this entire ceasefire plan.

The third and most intriguing of the current initiatives is the "hudna"
or traditional Arab tribal ceasefire. Initiated by a group of private
Israelis, at one point about half a year ago the "hudna" idea even held
the allegiance of president of Israel Moshe Katzav and was approved by
the Palestinian Cabinet. Currently the organizers seek to stage a kind
of mass "happening" in Jerusalem, with the blessings of Arafat, where a
ceasefire will be declared at the popular level.

This kind of grassroots enthusiasm for peacemaking is impressive and
encouraging. But it is doubtful that it will work. For one, Palestinian
militants are not likely participants in the Jerusalem meeting. Nor
would the Israeli delegation necessarily represent all key sectors of
society, such as the settlers in the West Bank and Gaza. Hence the
meeting could take place and a "popular" ceasefire be declared, yet
violence could continue.

Perhaps most important, the "hudna" idea is clearly rejected by Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon, who seeks Palestinian surrender rather than
reconciliation, while Arafat's support is more a liability than an
advantage in the eyes of the Israeli public, due to his lack of
credibility. Indeed, both Sharon and US President George W. Bush,
another key player whose support is vital, insist on the removal of
Arafat before any serious progress can take place.

In general, none of the ceasefire initiatives appears to reflect a
genuine process of soul searching on both sides regarding the root
causes of the current conflict and ways to deal with them. Rather, they
reflect war fatigue.

And under prevailing circumstances this is probably not a sufficient
foundation for a stable ceasefire. With all due encouragement for the
efforts of sincere people on both sides, no sustained progress, military
or political, appears likely as long as not one of the three key leaders
adopts a realistic strategy for ending the violence and returning to a
fruitful peace process. And when that does happen--we won't need private
ceasefire initiatives.

