Q: Do you take Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei (Abu
Ala) seriously?

A: I take him seriously, [in the sense that] he listens to
the internal Israeli demands regarding demography, and he's using them.
He's not saying that he will demand [a one state solution]; he's still
committed to the two state solution.

Q: Why Abu Ala?

A: I can't second-guess him. I think he's part of the debate,
part of the discourse that I'm also involved in. He understands that if
there's no progress then the condition of binationalism, which already
exists, will become even more established. The situation now is
binational, [it involves] not only [Israeli] occupation of the West Bank
and Gaza. Beyond military occupation, this is a process that began 25 to
30 years ago and now resembles a quasi-permanent domination of the area
and a recreation of mandatory Palestine as one single geopolitical
entity. Therefore what Abu Ala appears to be saying is, we're talking
not about a wish but a fact. You don't want it, but this is the way you
realistically define the situation. Very soon it will be clear to all
that this is what has happened.

Q: Is a viable two state solution no longer feasible?

A: We have a problem of definition. What two states? Viable
solution, or viable states? This needs a lot of clarification. By now
the chances for two completely separate sovereign states, say resembling
Israel and Jordan, are impossible. To make that surgical partition and
create boundaries that leave both states independent and sovereign in
all respects is impossible.

Q: What about the two state solution now advocated by
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon?

A: A Palestinian state limited to less than half of the West
Bank and two thirds of Gaza is acceptable to Sharon. A two state
solution based on a willingness to divide the land equitably has now
been turned into a slogan of Sharon and company, the Israeli right, that
creates a system of domination that resembles a bantustan. So the two
state debate today has a totally different twist.

Q: Is a single state solution good for Israelis?

A: A single state can be a model for soft partition, as
opposed to a surgical partition with finite borders that separates two
distinct political entities. You can come up with a model of power
sharing on the federal level and sharing the territory. The boundaries
of the provinces will be softer than the rigid borders of two political
entities and this can resolve some of the problems that surgical
partition exacerbates.

Q: How would a federal system work?

A: It doesn't divide Israel from the West Bank only, but it
should deal with [territory] west of the green line as well. The
capitals can be on a two-tier system. [It would be] a federated system
based on the principle of identity between ethnic groups and the
territory they control. But control is not sovereign. Solutions to
recent inter-communal conflicts were not based on the British standard
solution of partition, but rather on power sharing and federation.
Dayton, Good Friday in Ireland, the aftermath of the bloody civil war in
Lebanon all involve power-sharing and confessional arrangements between
the parties.

Q: What about the South African example?

A: The only place there is a unitary system solution is South
Africa, but that's unique, and based not on partition but on majority
rule. There are many models of binationalism, but the only way its being
interpreted in Israel/Palestine is "one man, one vote." That's not
suitable and it's a model I reject. The [prediction that South
Africanization of the conflict means the] "end of the Jewish state" is a
scarecrow; it's suggested to show that binationalism cannot work. But
this is not the model I suggest. There should be a model that respects
national culture and channels the conflict between ethnic groups, and
not the system of majority over minority tyranny represented by one man,
one vote.

Q: Is the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) capable
of making the switch? After all, it rejected Abu Ala's suggestion.

A: Now, absolutely not--nor is the Zionist establishment in
Israel. The PLO thrives on the two state solution; the Palestinian
National Authority cannot survive without it. It is only when
[Palestinians] face the total bankruptcy of the PNA and its failure that
they will understand that not only did [the PNA] not do anything, it
ruined the chances of the Palestinians to get anything out of the
Israelis. The notion that there is a PNA is what allows the ongoing
occupation.

Q: Are there Palestinians who advocate your point of view?

A: There are a lot of them, but others cherish the pipedream
that they'll win the battle of the womb. A system that allows the
automatic victory of those that breed is impossible. I don't suggest
that Israel commit suicide. My system can be made to work with the
Palestinians. This is a Siamese twins situation of Israel and Palestine
living in one ecosystem in which only close binational cooperation will
work. If there's no close cooperation nothing will happen, and Israeli
domination and superior power will be the case forever.

Q: So matters will get worse before they get better?

A: Things are already bad enough. The only thing not clear to
people is where they are. Once the illusions are dispelled, people on
both sides will have to turn to interim agreements as steps toward the
creation of new conditions and a new level of cooperation. Unilateral
moves won't work. The current way--either a Palestinian state or
nothing--will lead us nowhere.

