Q: Is the current parallel political instability in Israel
and Palestine coincidental?

A: No doubt there is a connection. The political paralysis in
Israel and Palestine has something in common. In Israel the composition
of the Knesset does not allow any real progress toward peace. On the
Palestinian side, the rivalry between Yasser Arafat and the rest of the
leadership has the same effect.

Q: In Israel, coalition negotiations with Labor begin this
week. What are the chances for success?

A: I don't bet on a longstanding partnership, because basically our
[Labor's] concept and Sharon's are entirely different. We are ready to
join him for a limited period of time, only to make sure he is the one
that dismantles settlements and starts the withdrawal. This is the only
reason.

If there is no Likud readiness to make substantial changes in the
government guidelines, there is no real chance for a coalition. In Gaza
we need a concrete and shorter timetable for withdrawal. If this doesn't
change and there is no change in [Finance Minister Binyamin] Netanyahu's
social agenda, we have no reason to join.

Q: Is there a basis of mutual trust between Labor and Likud
on the Gaza disengagement issue?

A: What Sharon really wants is to solidify his grip on the West
Bank and materialize his vision of the final boundaries of Israel,
giving the Palestinians sovereignty in seven West Bank enclaves and
Gaza, with Israel retaining half the West Bank under its control. We may
join his coalition not because we accept the entire plan or don't see
the deception, but because we want him to take the first step of
dismantling settlements and to pave the way for us in the future.

Sharon's plan is based on the false assumption that there is no
Palestinian partner. He made sure there is none by giving nothing to a
possible moderate partner, because such a partner would not accept his
final vision of seven enclaves plus Gaza as a Palestinian state. So
there is no reason for us to stay in Sharon's coalition beyond limited
disengagement.

Q: As a veteran observer of the Palestinian scene, how do
you think the current Palestinian governmental crisis will be resolved?

A: We are talking as events occur every hour. This upheaval may
evolve into substantial changes in the Palestinian political structure.
But one thing is for sure: there is great discontent among the
Palestinian population. I have been talking with Palestinians for the
last two weeks; there is great discontent with Arafat. One day the
Palestinians in the territories will say enough is enough to
incompetence. To quote what General Nasser Yusuf told Arafat in a bitter
argument, "All the national revolutions in this generation have
succeeded, but yours."

Q: Is Israel's disengagement plan a positive or negative
catalyst for Palestinians?

A: Paradoxically, though I don't like the hidden agenda of this
plan, which is annexation of at least half the West Bank, I think it
stimulated the Palestinians to action. For the first time, they
responded in a [historically] Zionist way. They said okay, what you
give, we take. At least somebody like Mohammad Dahlan spoke in this
spirit, and this is very encouraging.

Q: Whether or not Labor joins the coalition, the next
Israeli elections have to be held within a little over two years. Are
the settlements and disengagement issues likely to affect those elections?

A: In this regard, the next election in Israel should be one of
national decision and not national consensus.

