Optimists on the Palestinian-Israeli conflict are basing their hopes on
a number of recent changes. These include the Labor-Likud coalition in
Israel, the new-old administration in Washington, the absence of late
President Yasser Arafat and the smooth transition and upcoming elections
in Palestine.

The coalition in Israel seems to be the least significant among these,
though it can be considered an indicator of possible change in Israel.
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's speech at the Herzliya Conference
did not include anything new in substance, but it did set a slightly
different tone, especially with this right wing leader's reference to
the problems resulting from Israelis occupying another people (this new
tone falls short of significant change since he did not refer to the
problems of controlling another people's land).

From a Palestinian perspective there is less excitement about the
coalition than there may be from an Israeli perspective. One reason is
the previous experience of such a Sharon-led coalition, which did not
mark any serious change in the positions and practices of Sharon's
leadership. Indeed, the previous coalition government including Sharon
and Labor leader Shimon Peres was really a continuity of the Likud
government, only with a better PR image because of Peres' high
international standing.

The coalition comes at a relatively significant time, a time of a
possible unilateral withdrawal of the Israeli army and settlers from a
few settlements in Gaza and the northern West Bank. This plan, if
implemented as declared, is not going to move things forward. According
to the World Bank report published last month, it will rather lead to
further decline in economic indicators, including income, growth and
unemployment.

The plan can, however, be developed in a way that can serve the cause of
peace if it is put into a more comprehensive context and is no longer
implemented unilaterally. For that to happen it would need to include
three additional components. 1) The withdrawal from Gaza should happen
in parallel with a full cessation of all settlement activities in the
West Bank. 2) There should be a full end to the occupation in Gaza
including ending Israeli control over borders and allowing the free
movement of goods and people through the sea and airport. 3) Free
movement between and inside the West Bank and Gaza must be allowed.

Add these three elements to the plan and the overall situation can
improve politically, economically and security-wise, and might even
prepare the ground for a resumption of negotiations.

If the Labor party, after joining the government, is not able to develop
this unilateral plan in the direction indicated above, then Labor's
inclusion in the coalition will be a harmful development because it will
simply serve to strengthen the current Israeli leadership that is
responsible for getting us into the mess we are in.

This is a significant juncture in the history of the conflict, and many
people see opportunities to move ahead. But an increase in the
international efforts by the Quartet countries and on the basis of the
roadmap will be timely and useful. The first phase of the roadmap
provides the comprehensive package that is necessary to move things
forward because it includes political components, such as stopping
settlement expansions; economic components, such as increasing foreign
aid and removing Israeli-imposed obstacles to economic recovery in the
Palestinian territories; and finally security components, a commitment
by both Israelis and Palestinians to simultaneously stop acts of
violence against each other.

