Ariel Sharon's success in bringing Labor into his new disengagement
coalition reflects the prime minister's iron determination: he has
overcome repeated obstacles from the political right, including from
within his own party, and has triumphed. This victory for disengagement
is also a major setback for the settlement movement.

But the new coalition is not likely to hold together for more than a
year. It will, if all goes well, oversee disengagement from the Gaza
Strip and northern Samaria, then almost certainly collapse,
precipitating elections a little less than a year before the statutory
deadline of November 2006.

Likud is bringing the Labor party into the coalition because Sharon
needs a Knesset majority in order for his government to remain in office
and carry out disengagement--and a Likud/Labor/Torah Judaism coalition
is the only one his reluctant party will acquiesce in. For its part,
Labor is joining the coalition for a wider variety of reasons. Under the
leadership of Shimon Peres, it is not built for the political wilderness
of opposition. It believes it will have more influence inside the
government than out. But primarily, Labor believes in disengagement and
hopes to benefit politically from its implementation.

This means that next fall, assuming disengagement has been carried out
successfully, the two main parties will again part company. The Likud
rank and file, ever suspicious of Sharon's motives, will insist that no
further disengagement be carried out and no significant peace process be
launched by his government. Labor under Peres will insist on a renewed
peace process. If, in next June's Labor leadership primaries, Ehud Barak
takes over, he will demand additional, comprehensive disengagements. Any
new leader of Labor is likely to pull the party out of the coalition
following the completion of disengagement in September if only to gear
up for elections. In short, there will be little to hold the coalition
together for another year.

And if disengagement does not go well? If Jews spill the blood of fellow
Jews, anger and dissention spread across the land, and some settlements
in Gaza are not removed? If chaos reigns in post-withdrawal Gaza, and
Egypt and the international community blame Israel? Under those
unfortunate scenarios Sharon and his government will be discredited,
with Likud reacting by pulling to the right and Labor to the left. Once
again, elections will be the logical outcome.

If this assessment regarding the relatively short life-span of the new
government proves accurate, it has important consequences not only for
Israel. An election campaign in Israel in late 2005-early 2006 means a
break in the momentum generated by disengagement. It means the next
Palestinian government, assuming it is relatively moderate and opposes
violence, will have to suffice with a coordinated disengagement from
Gaza and the northern West Bank for the coming 18 months until a newly
elected Israeli government is on its feet and functioning. And the Bush
administration, if indeed it is prepared to devote its energies to the
creation of a viable Palestinian state following disengagement, will
have to wait even longer, since Bush is unlikely to get involved in a
situation that may require him to pressure Israel during the months
running up to midterm elections in the US in November 2006. Indeed,
Sharon himself could conceivably precipitate early elections if he
assesses that administration pressures are in the offing.

While a successful disengagement process next summer is likely to ensure
that Sharon remains leader of the Likud in the coming elections, it is
far less certain that either he or his party's platform will endorse
additional disengagements or a serious peace process as the next stage.
Nor is it clear whether the next Knesset will be any more disposed to a
comprehensive peace or disengagement process than is the current one.

This means that what you see in this new Israeli government is what you
get: a vehicle for carrying out disengagement from the Gaza Strip and
the northern West Bank. That is now likely to be the principal--perhaps
the only--significant peace process-related event of the coming 18-24
months. Anyone laying plans to exploit the "momentum" and the "dynamic"
of the disengagement in order to press for more, must bear this in
mind.

