A strange phenomenon seems to have been taking place in the nature of
the ongoing conflict and struggle between Palestinians and Israelis.
Suddenly there is a decline in the level of tension between the two
parties, at the same time that there is an increase in each side's
internal turmoil and political confrontation. Israel has recently seen
very controversial meetings of its two leading parties. The Likud
Central Committee witnessed a great deal of competition and tension
between its two main wings, that of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon and
former prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu. Similarly, the Labor Party is
also demonstrating tough competition between its two opposing
wings--those of party head Fuad Ben Eliezer and his competitor Haim Ramon.

Simultaneously, Palestinian internal politics have become very heated in
recent weeks, especially since President Yasser Arafat's release from
the Israeli-imposed siege. Here, the tension and political confrontation
is more complicated--sometimes it is about reform and corruption,
sometimes it is over the use of various forms of resistance, and other
times it is about whether to continue the Intifada. In all cases, these
internal fights are drawing on the energy usually invested by
Palestinians in the fight and their confrontations with the Israeli side.

There is, however, one thing in common between these internal tensions:
they are mostly a display of power politics between different components
of each political elite. Netanyahu seems to have chosen to challenge
Sharon on the issue of Palestinian statehood, largely because this is a
winning horse in Likud political circles. Similarly, Ramon has taken
advantage of the fact that the Palestinian leadership, in particular
President Arafat, has been discredited within the Israeli public as a
partner for a peace process as a result of the successful Likud media
campaign alleging Arafat's personal involvement in violence against
Israelis. These new charges come, of course, after a previous but
similar Labor Party campaign that led the Israeli public to believe that
Arafat's rejection of such a "generous offer" at Camp David means that
he is either unwilling or unable to be a partner in a peace agreement.

The point here is that politicians in Israel are competing against each
other in order to gain power by appealing to the increasingly extremist
tendencies within Israeli public opinion. Hence, real possibilities for
peace are destined to fall victim to this power struggle. Practically
speaking, the Likud's reiteration of its opposition to the Palestinian
state has a negative outcome, no matter how slim the chances may be for
peace negotiations with the Likud Party.

Similarly, the atmosphere created in the Labor Party, in particular the
consensus that there is no Palestinian peace partner and momentum
towards unilateral steps are bad news for the peace process. Peace takes
two parties, not one. No matter how few Israelis want to believe it,
this Palestinian leadership is the right partner for peace with Israel.
The widespread Israeli conviction that there is no Palestinian partner
does not reflect the political reality in Palestine, but is the result
of a successful, comprehensive and discrediting public relations campaign.

These power struggles appeal to extremist fad politics and do not
address the vital interests of both sides in returning the
Palestinian-Israeli relationship to one of negotiations, rather than
confrontation. In deed, they seem to multiply the tension between
Palestinians and Israelis by nurturing the argument for and
encouragement of extremist politics on the opposing side. In the final
analysis, this will only feed the deepening hatred and consequent gulf
of violence between the two. Peace advocates among both Palestinians and
Israelis must buck this trend with a central strategy of addressing the
internal politics of their own people.

