Q: In both the Likud and Labor everything appears to be
revolving at present around Yasir Arafat and the political process. Is
it healthy for Israeli politics when Arafat is our no. 1 political player?

A: Indeed, a popular issue connected to the Palestinian question
is being used to try to gain control over each party. In the Likud,
Binyamin Netanyahu believes that if he won a vote to reject a
Palestinian state, he has won the leadership. In Labor, Haim Ramon hopes
to pull the party out of the government by raising the unilateral
withdrawal issue and exploiting the general frustration. I don't believe
in this approach; it's wrong to act in this way. After all, if Bibi
[Netanyahu] becomes prime minister he'll find himself stuck with a
decision negating a Palestinian state that he himself rammed through the
Central Committee, and he'll have to change his position and acquiesce
in a solution based on a Palestinian state.

Q: Nevertheless, did Netanyahu register a victory here? Was
Sharon weakened?

A: Netanyahu may have won a battle, but he lost the war. You have
to lead, not run after the herd. This absence of leadership contributes
to the general public's frustration with politicians.

Q: Are you hinting that you intend to run again for
leadership of the Likud?

A: As the next primaries approach I may be a contender; I never
abandoned this option.

Q: Will the maneuvers you have described in Labor and the
Likud lead to early elections?

A: I don't think so. Labor won't leave the coalition now, since
it has nowhere to go. Fuad Ben Eliezer in any case has no one to talk to
among the Palestinians, so what's the point of all the concessions he is
presenting? As for the Likud Central Committee, it cannot dictate to the
government how to act, nor is it requested to approve political
agreements. A mere minority of members of the Central Committee voted
against a Palestinian state; most members didn't even participate in the
meeting. In the final analysis, neither the Likud nor Labor is
important, but the State of Israel. Here we have forgotten about the
rest of our problems, our difficult domestic problems. Perhaps we should
inform the Palestinians that for the time being there will be no
political track, while we deal with domestic affairs.

Q: Is the Palestinian state that Sharon conceives of (a state
limited more or less to the territories currently under Palestinian
control, for a prolonged interim period) realistic?

A: First of all, just as the Palestinians say they insist on 100
percent, we too have the right to present any position we like as an
opener for negotiations. The interim period is designed to enable the
reconstruction of the Palestinian economy, while a Palestinian entity
controls 95 percent of the Palestinian people. If we negotiate the
Palestinian issue at a regional conference then it will be with the Arab
states, not Arafat. They'll present their solution and we'll present
Sharon's minimalist position.

Q: The prime minister has long argued that there already is a
de facto Palestinian state. As Israel's Minister of Justice, do you
believe there still exists such a de facto state? Didn't Operation
Defensive Shield destroy this state?

A: The Palestinian Authority controls 95 percent of the
Palestinian people, and its borders are clearly defined. Governmental
systems and institutions, such as education, exist. Hence this is still
a de facto state, albeit one that supports terrorism, which we had no
alternative but to strike hard at.

