In general, it is difficult to refer to any armed or violent conflict as
"moral" in the sense that usually one party if not both overstep the
line of what is considered appropriate behavior. Further, the narrative
of a conflict often rests on the definition of what is moral in the eyes
of the beholder.

From its inception, the Palestinian-Israeli conflict was no different,
with immoral behavior spurring a tragedy that devastated the Palestinian
people. Our conflict began when Jewish immigrants arrived in Palestine
intending to establish a political entity for the Jewish people on this
land--land already home to Palestinians. One of the strategies employed
by these immigrants included the forceful taking of land belonging to
Palestinian farmers. Then in 1948, 800,000 Palestinians were expelled
and fled from their land, becoming refugees. Jewish militias carried out
a series of massacres intending to frighten villagers with a dire fate
if they remained. Finally, once the land had come under Jewish control,
400 Palestinian villages were entirely demolished to prevent their
inhabitants from returning. This erasing of the landscape was not the
result of an earthquake or nature taking its course, but the willful act
of human beings against an entire community.

For three decades, Israel tried to deny that this injustice was
intentional, until Israeli historians, the "new historians", documented
with the help of records released from Israel's archives that many of
these massacres were carried out in order to generate terror and thus
cause Palestinians to leave their land for other destinations. Today, we
are reaping the seeds planted in Israel's birth. All that has happened
since occurred in the context of this historic injustice, which was
conducted with the tacit support of the British Mandate government and
later, that of the United States.

Born from this rocky soil, Palestinian engagement has also wavered
between the poles of acceptable resistance and immorality, as it were.
During the sixties, when the Palestinian people and leadership found
themselves dispersed and desperate to remain on the agenda, some attacks
targeting civilians (Israelis and westerners) were tried with the
intention of attracting the world's attention. This worked in practice
but failed in strategy, as such activities only earned the Palestinian
people a very negative reputation from which they suffer yet today. In
the late eighties, a different tack was tried in the form of the
intifada, or uprising, in which Palestinians used boycotts and strikes
and peaceful public demonstrations to try to rid themselves of the
Israeli occupation and correct the injustice they had experienced.

Unfortunately, the negotiations that resulted from the intifada still
did not bring Palestinians closer to their objective of ending the
occupation and a just resolution for the refugee crisis. This failure
brought Palestinians to the next phase of the Palestinian struggle that
used illegal tactics--during the peace process itself. Here we saw
vicious and immoral attacks by both sides against the civilians of the
other. In 1990, Israeli soldiers killed 23 unarmed Palestinians that had
come to protest a right-wing Israeli demonstration at Jerusalem's Al
Aqsa Mosque. In another case, 29 Palestinians at prayer in Hebron were
killed by right-wing Israeli Baruch Goldstein, whose memory is still
revered at a shrine erected in the Hebron settlement of Kiryat Arba.

But that period was also the beginning of the phenomenon of suicide
bombings and the engagement of Islamist groups in their violent struggle
with Israel. Although suicide bombings inside Israel have always been
condemned by the Palestinian leadership, both because they are seen as
"dirty warfare" and because they contradict the leadership's political
program, which advocates the two state solution and therefore opposes
armed attacks inside the borders of Israel, the two sides seem to be
inexorably caught in the grip of uninhibited violence against the other.

Recently, there have been calls from both sides for an agreement between
Israelis and Palestinians to stop targeting civilians. But only during
the several weeks of tenure of Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas
were Palestinian militants convinced to stop attacks, and subsequently
there was a marked drop in attacks on civilians on both sides.
Unfortunately, that respite ended with the renewal of Israeli
assassinations of Palestinian activists, and with it Palestinian
reciprocity.

Where there is violence, there are bound to be atrocities, and if we
have learned anything in our history, it is that violence between
Palestinians and Israelis stems from the lack of a political solution
that will ensure our future and address the wrongs of the past. The only
way to end the suffering of both peoples is through political engagement
that has the power to demonstrate to both publics that there is a
peaceful means by which Palestinians can end the occupation, which is
the source of all their problems, and through which Israelis can achieve
the objectives of integration, peace and security.

