About 60 years ago I was a member of the Jewish underground in Eretz
Yisrael/Palestine. I was a member of the Hagana, and in 1944 I was
conscripted into the Palmach, the Hagana's standing unit that was at the
command of the elected institutions of the Jewish Yishuv, or community.

In 1945 I was dispatched on my first military action, a demonstrative
act of sabotage at 10 locations along the Tel Aviv-Jerusalem railroad.
We considered our military struggle to be a legitimate one: we sought to
end the British Mandate and establish an independent and sovereign
Hebrew state. In the short term we had two objectives: we demanded
annulment of the "White Paper" and the British lands act, along with
entry into the country of hundreds of thousands of Jews who had survived
the Nazi extermination camps.

We were convinced that we were waging a legitimate and moral struggle.
The British called it acts of terrorism. It was a classic example of the
difficulty of finding an agreed definition. To my mind the definition
was pure and simple: the key to distinguishing between a legitimate
struggle and acts of terrorism is not the strategic objectives of the
perpetrator; rather, it lies in the tactics of warfare and the targets
that are hit.

Recently we were once again confronted with this issue in the case of a
letter signed by 27 Israel Air Force (IAF) pilots, who declared that
they would refuse in future to take part in military actions against
targets located in populated areas of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. They
refused to engage in any offensive action that could inadvertently end
up in injury to innocent civilians.

I can understand the writers' spirit. But I completely reject their
collective refusal to obey orders. This refusal is primarily political,
not moral.

Since the insane slaughter carried out by Border Patrol soldiers in Qafr
Qassem (October 1956), the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) has openly
defined what constitutes a clearly illegal command. According to this
definition, not only is it unnecessary to carry out such a command, but
anyone who does carry it out cannot claim immunity because he was "only
obeying orders".

I share the IAF pilots' political outlook. I too want the Israeli
occupation to end, with the vast majority of the settlements removed and
a political agreement accepted by both sides. Yet despite the 36 years
that have elapsed since June 1967, there was nothing illegal or immoral
about the IDF conquest of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, and we should
not confuse a political debate with illegal acts of disobedience.

Unlike Palestinian terrorism that is consciously, deliberately and
almost exclusively directed against innocent Israeli civilians, not a
single military task assigned to the Israeli security forces has been
consciously and with forethought intended to injure civilians. Sadly,
the hiding places of Palestinian terrorists are almost always located in
the midst of heavily populated urban areas.

Some 60 years ago, at the height of World War II, we witnessed countless
military acts that were deliberately directed against innocent civilian
populations. Nazi Germany started it when its planes indiscriminately
bombed the cities of Poland, and continued with similar bombings of
cities in Holland, Belgium and France, followed by the brutal blitz of
British cities. The Allies' acts of revenge in bombing Germany and later
Japan were no different. Both were clearly illegal acts under the IDF's
code of ethics.

I have been involved in Israel's wars since November 29, 1947. All these
wars, without exception, were hard and cruel. Yet I am proud that I
never was concerned over an issue involving our moral code of warfare.
There were--and I fear will be in future--unintended acts of aggression;
not a few soldiers at the local level have exceeded orders and violated
recognized moral norms. But never was a command given to strike
deliberately at civilians.

Despite my differences of opinion with the government's policies, I'm
satisfied that this same government maintains the moral code of warfare
of the IDF and of the people of Israel at a high level.

