Q: What did you make of Sharon's Herzliya speech?

A: I think Sharon wanted to send a message to Abu Mazen (Mahmoud
Abbas). At the moment it seems all the doors are open to Abu Mazen from
the international community, and the United States as well as the EU and
Arab countries have offered him their support. I think Sharon was not
happy with this and he wanted to put an end to any dreams Abu Mazen may
harbor. When Abu Mazen was in Lebanon, he was talking about the right of
return and a Palestinian state etc. I think Sharon wanted to send a very
clear message to Abu Mazen that "you should not dream about all these
issues, the division of Jerusalem, the return of the refugees, a pure
Palestinian state with control over borders". I think this was the
intent of the speech.

Q: What about the timing?

A: Abu Mazen seems certain to be the next president and he is
working according to this. He has received support from everyone
including from within Fateh. I think he wants to prove that he can keep
to the path of Arafat and the rights of Palestinians and the hope for a
real Palestinian state, so he has repeated this in every Arab capital.
Sharon, who opposes all these issues, wanted to put an end to this talk.

Q: You would have thought that with Abu Mazen talking about
ending the armed uprising, Sharon would want to encourage him?

A: You would have thought. I have heard from Abu Mazen and other
leaders in Fateh, however, including Mohammad Dahlan, that they don't
have faith in getting an agreement with Sharon. I think Abu Mazen has
told Arab leaders that Sharon is not easy to negotiate with, and I don't
think Sharon is interested in encouraging or giving Abu Mazen any
support. I think he is looking to the other side, to the coalition and
his own position as prime minister, to the right wing parties and the
settlers and so on. I don't think he is interested in sending Abu Mazen
any flowers or giving him any encouragement at all.

Q: What about the coalition government? Do you think
bringing Labor into the Israeli government will change anything?

A: First of all, if we look back at the experience of two years
ago when there was a Labor-Likud government, they followed the same
policies, the assassinations, demolishing homes, fighting and destroying
the PA. I don't think it will be different now. Labor is very weak, and
I don't think they have any ability to impact the Likud party. They will
hold no sensitive positions, like defense or foreign affairs. It will be
very difficult for them to change any policies of Sharon, and they will
just provide him support to withdraw from Gaza. Labor will be a slave to
its master, the Likud.

Q: So you see no change on the Israeli side. Where does
that leave the Palestinian side?

A: Well, I don't think the Authority or people in general are
worried about the coalition. We are worried about our own leadership. I
hope Abu Mazen can change the situation here, and forge a new political
strategy, and cooperate with Hamas and other factions. He needs to take
steps first of all to make reform in society, and also to set a clear
political line that does not waver an inch from the Palestinian state on
1967 borders. That will satisfy the factions, Hamas, and the people. The
people want a strong leadership to prevent this right wing Israeli
government from imposing a temporary solution, starting with Gaza and
then postponing other issues for maybe 20 years. Abu Mazen should not be
deceived or trapped by this coalition government in Israel

Q: Are you optimistic that Hamas and Abu Mazen can work
something out?

A: Yes, I think so. I think they are getting closer to each other.
I think Hamas believes Abu Mazen is very straight, he says what he can
or cannot do, and he is open about his thoughts and plans, so I think
there is a good chance for Hamas to cooperate with Abu Mazen and
participate in the PLC election and affect PA decisions and the
political track. This is the time for Hamas to play a big role and exert
influence within the government and the Authority. Abu Mazen cannot do
like Arafat and act freely without responding from pressure from the
inside, the factions and even Fateh.

Q: But how far can such a program go unless there is some
action, or non-action if you like, from the Israelis?

A: We can do things. We can fight corruption. There are many
corrupt people. This can be done away from the bigger political picture.
I heard Abu Mazen yesterday say that we should not blame all our
mistakes on the occupation. We can reform, and we can change the
situation in the PA. This does not mean that the occupation does not
play a big role in the corruption. We cannot impose PA control
everywhere, institutions are destroyed and it's impossible to move
freely. But I think Abu Mazen is determined that he can do something to
change things internally.

Q: How important are Israeli statements that they will move
checkpoints and move out of cities and facilitate elections?

A: I heard [Mustapha] Barghouti speak yesterday, saying he has
moved around and not seen any change. I think the Israelis sometimes use
their presence as occupation forces in the territories to exert
political pressure. I don't think they will move their forces or allow
Palestinians to move freely. I think they want to put a sword at the
neck of Abu Mazen to make their power felt. Maybe for a day or two they
will retreat a little, but after the election everything will go back to
the way it is today.

