The overwhelming and ongoing atrocities have left most Palestinians with
little space and peace of mind to ponder and intellectualize over the
moral question of our resistance; most of the time our reactions to
events are instinctive and emotional. Those few who still consider the
moral, political and strategic aspects of the Palestinian struggle may
find themselves at an impasse due to all the contradicting factors: the
cruelty of war that hurts the conscience and boggles the mind.

In assessing the Palestinians' resistance, one must take into
consideration the troubled context of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
The occupation of Palestine started with an ideology that denied the
very existence of the Palestinian people and pursued a colonial agenda
asserting divine claims to acquire the "land without the people." It was
in order to gain recognition as a national group, thus defying the
colonial agenda, that Palestinians resorted to hijacking in the seventies.

Still today, Palestinians have no state or conventional army. We are
subjected to curfews, expulsions, home demolitions, legalized torture,
and a wide variety of human rights violations. There is a glaring
contrast between the level of official responsibility and the systematic
nature of the violence exchanged between Palestinian individuals and the
state of Israel. The media has attributed our search for freedom to
"terrorism", thus making the Palestinian the international prototype for
the terrorist. This impression has shaped Western public consciousness
and resulted in an international bias that tends to convey instances of
violence against Palestinian civilians in neutral language, reducing
Palestinian losses to mere statistics, while using emotional language
and visuals to describe Israeli losses.

The negotiations with Israel have given us nothing but promises of
autonomy over our impoverishment, implementing what is acceptable to the
mighty and treating facts established illegally as the basis for a
settlement. Most missing in this peace process was an honest peace
broker. The United Nations has been unable to take steps to ensure the
implementation of Palestinian rights. The world has offered not a single
remedy for the numerous wrongs Palestinians have endured; the American
veto in the Security Council has been used repeatedly against the broad
consensus calling for an international monitoring presence in the West
Bank and Gaza. The relentless denial of Palestinian rights without an
effective international response has left us acutely aware that
self-help is our only hope. We are facing a brutal occupation with bare
chests and empty arms.

International law gives a people fighting an illegal occupation the
right to use "all necessary means at their disposal" to end their
occupation, and the occupied "are entitled to seek and receive support"
(I quote here several United Nations resolutions). Armed resistance was
used in the American revolution, the Afghan resistance against Russia,
the French resistance against the Nazis, and even in the Nazi
concentration camps, or more famously in the Warsaw Ghetto. Palestinian
resistance varies from that which is non-violent and widespread: simply
continuing to live, study, pray and plant in occupied land despite all
the odds, to active resistance and the use of violence. This violent
resistance can be defensive (and to my mind morally acceptable), such as
the resistance of the fighters of Jenin refugee camp as Israeli death
machines approached, or in the form of unacceptable offensive acts, such
as the bombing of Israelis celebrating a Passover meal. In all these
cases, it is individuals that choose their form of resistance; the
choices they make should not color the entire nation. And, as we have
seen, both peaceful and violent resistance is met with profound state
violence from the Israeli side. The death of American activist Rachel
Corrie is evidence of that.

Violent resistance arises from an inhuman military occupation, one that
levies punishment without fairness, denies the possibility of livelihood
and diverts the prospects of a promising future. The Palestinian people
have not gone to another people's homeland to kill or dispossess. Our
ambition is not to blow ourselves up in order to terrify others. We are
asking for what all other people have and deserve, a decent life in a
homeland.

What is most troubling about the critiques of our resistance is that
they seem to care little about our suffering, the withholding of what we
once possessed, and the violation of our most basic rights. Our murder
leaves those critics cold. Our peaceful, everyday struggle to have a
decent life leaves no impression. There is outrage and condemnation when
some of us follow the instinct of retaliation and revenge. Israeli
security is deemed more important than our livelihood; Israeli children
more human than ours; Israeli pain more inflammatory than ours. They
dismiss us as terrorists, enemies of human life and civilization. And so
I emphasize, it is not for their sake that we must revisit our
resistance, but because we care about Palestinian morality and morale.

To submit to injustice is incompatible with psychological health.
Resistance is a right, a duty and a remedy for the oppressed. It is
important, however, to design limits for the use of arms. Palestinian
resistance must be explored and assessed from the perspectives of law,
morality and politics, taking timing and context into account and with
sensitivity for widely-shared norms of behavior. Palestinians need to be
creative in providing effective peaceful alternatives for resistance
that can invite the progressives of the world to join our struggle. The
strength of the Palestinian plight lies in its moral, humanitarian
characteristics; we should find moral, humanitarian means to protect
that strength.

