Q: How do you view the recent Likud meeting in which the
Israeli Likud Party reiterated its opposition to Palestinian statehood?

A: This shows that that particular faction in the Likud is the
only group in the entire world that opposes the creation of a
Palestinian state. Even the camp of [Israeli Prime Minister Ariel]
Sharon in the Likud could not agree with [former Israeli Prime Minister
Benjamin] Netanyahu and his group. Ultimately their views will not have
any impact on the international consensus over the Palestinian state,
including the strategic ally of Israel, the United States, which now
talks about both Palestine and Israel.

We know that there is competition between Netanyahu and Sharon, but the
Likud leaders headed by Netanyahu have to act as leaders, responsible
leaders, and their decisions and attitudes must take into account the
interests of the Israeli people and peace and stability. By adopting
this aggressive position they are only further isolating themselves.
They will have a very hard time finding a respectable group in the world
to share this position.

Q: Do you see this in any way as a setback for
Palestinian statehood?

A: No, because we are not expecting any better from a group that
is opposed by Sharon himself, whom we consider the ultimate form of
radicalism here. It is a setback for the Likud Party and for the people
who champion this attitude and it is a setback for Israel, because
Israel should not take any pride in being the only isolated voice across
the world opposing Palestinian statehood, which was endorsed by the
international community, a United Nations Security Council resolution,
the position of the United States, and so on.

Sooner or later, a Palestinian state is going to be there and this
incumbent government takes no credit for delaying that eventuality.

Q: What do you make of the jockeying in the Labor Party,
where Haim Ramon seems to be calling for a unilateral Israeli withdrawal
and Fuad Ben Eliezer is going back to Camp David?

A: I think that there are politicians in Israel who put their own
agendas ahead of the national agenda, at the expense of regenerating the
conflict and hurting efforts to reach peaceful agreement with
Palestinians. These personal agendas and interests explain why, for
example, Ben Eliezer and others in the Labor Party are still serving in
the Sharon government to the dislike of many Labor Party leaders. I
think the Labor Party has managed to destroy every sign of
differentiation from the Likud Party and its policies. This will only
hurt the Labor Party in future elections.

Q: It seems that the thing that all of these ideas have
in common is that they assume that there is no Palestinian partner for
peace. How can Palestinians get past that Israeli perception?

A: This is called pretextual politics. The Likud and Sharon want
to avoid sitting and negotiating seriously on the issues of the
conflict: borders, Jerusalem, settlements and statehood. Sharon opposes
all of these things. If he sat and negotiated all of these things in
good faith, he would have saved Israel and the Palestinians a lot of
bloodshed.

The Labor Party adopted the same argument because it is weak. This is a
party that is unable to have its own distinct agenda, a party that has
failed to defend agreements that the Labor government signed with
Palestinians, a party that is too weak and opportunistic to speak to the
real cause of the collapse of the peace process, which is Sharon.
Between a party that has no peace agenda and a party that is too weak to
insist on its own distinct agenda, both have agreed to look for a
scapegoat under the pretext of security and violence, which are only
symptoms.

The real problem is the occupation and the unwillingness of these two
parties to say that the occupation is the source of all evils and then
end it. If it ends, at least one of the problems would be solved. They
know that Palestinians are not quarreling with Israel's right to exist
or its legitimate security concerns. When Israel insists on ignoring the
Palestinians, ignoring their legitimate rights and ignoring their
grievances, insisting on staying as an occupying power, what do they
expect from Palestinians? That they give them flowers?

