The weekend papers in Israel were full of the Sharon speech at Herzliya,
giving it the usual spin of optimism. Prime Minister Ariel Sharon talked
about the possibility of coordinating the Israeli withdrawal with the
Palestinians, but his pathos of historic optimism was directed toward
the Israeli public, describing the coming year 2005 as a year of
historic opportunity to change Israel's strategic situation from the
bottom up.

I looked for the words peace or Palestinian state and didn't find them,
even though on the radio, right after the speech, the impression was
created that Sharon said the Palestinians could establish their state in
the coming year. But what was reported off-hand in a closing sentence
was that Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas) was negative in his reaction to
Sharon, saying: "Sharon is the obstacle to peace. We reject his
declarations as a whole and one by one".

The two factors that combine to strengthen Sharon's position of
unilateralism are the death of Yasser Arafat and the reelection of
George W. Bush. When Sharon is talking of an historic opportunity he
means that, indeed, Israel is in some ways entering into favorable
strategic conditions almost to the extent of the opportunities which
were opened 15 years ago with the collapse of the Soviet Union. Not only
was the rear guard of the Arab enemies of Israel broken then, but a
major Arab enemy was crushed in 1991, thus creating what seemed like a
very favorable environment. Then came the Oslo accords and the
opportunity was lost, ushering in instead a new era of terrorism, the
politics of mass murder.

Sharon's opportunity now is to tear Israel from the clutches of peace
negotiations with the Palestinians as well as other Arab countries. The
kind of unilateralism embodied in disengagement means that Israel
regains control over its own fate, abandoning for good the dangerous
premise that its existential problem will be solved only in accordance
with the solution of the Palestinians' problems. A Palestinian state now
becomes only an option that Israel does not exclude, about which it
remains for the Palestinians to decide.

Abu Mazen's rejection of Sharon's speech clearly indicates that he does
not share Sharon's optimism. He sees the new conditions as constraining
for the Palestinians. However, Sharon's plan gives enough room for Abu
Mazen to gain control and concentrate on internal Palestinian affairs
for the next year or two. If terrorism subsides, Abu Mazen will face a
dilemma after completion of the Israeli disengagement: he will probably
demand from Israel and the US to go back to negotiations. Since the main
idea of disengagement is already political, Israel under Sharon will be
reluctant. Abu Mazen's legitimacy will be based on his ability to
deliver at the negotiating table. If this venue is basically closed, he
will lose legitimacy and Palestinian terrorism will resume.

This is where the Labor party differs from Sharon. Labor's entrance into
the government is clearly a limited alignment. Labor sees in
disengagement only the aspects of withdrawal and dismantling of
settlements. But it does not share the strategic principle that
underlies the disengagement plan, and that actually delays the
establishment of a Palestinian state and negates a negotiated peace. The
future of a Likud-Labor partnership largely depends on how far the
unilateral withdrawal goes and how long the process takes. Potentially,
the initial withdrawal from northern Samaria might end up as a long
stretch of land all the way to southern Mount Hebron, leaving in the
hands of the Palestinians all the private lands of the West Bank, while
Israel retains all the state-owned lands.

This process of partitioning the West Bank may take years, but during
that period a long-term partnership between the Likud and the Labor
party might emerge. This may lead both parties, as coalition-partners,
all the way to the next elections in November 2006. Afterwards,
continuation of this new political alliance will depend on the Likud
being able to preserve its current strength in the Knesset, and
continuation of Israel's new unilateral policy might depend on the
Labor-Likud alliance.

Meanwhile, this alliance depends on the current relative strength of
both parties. Paradoxically, if the Likud weakens in the next elections
and Labor regains strength--the Likud will drift rightward and Labor to
the left. Under these circumstances, the Likud loses its current
position as the axis of the political system, and it will inevitably
need the right wing parties to form a government.

Meanwhile, Sharon remains the preferred leader of the Israeli public,
which seems to favor the Likud-Labor alliance. With Sharon in place this
partnership could last for several years.

