All the angry criticism directed at the outposts and the successive
Israeli governments that allowed them to come into existence is true and
justified.

The outposts are illegal even by the questionable Israeli standards that
permitted construction of the settlements. Their ongoing presence in the
West Bank flies in the face of the Sharon government's solemn
commitments to the United States. Some outposts are blatantly situated
on private Palestinian land, the rest (like the settlements) on public
land that by any reasonable standard should be used for the benefit of
the Palestinian population, not Israeli settlers. They were constructed
with the underhanded support of a long line of government ministers,
whose abuse of funds for this purpose was conveniently ignored by a
series of attorneys general and state controllers.

At the strategic level, the outposts' geographic "deployment" is
designed to make it impossible to divide the land between the two
peoples, Israelis and Palestinians; hence their existence is
antithetical to the Zionist goal of a Jewish and democratic state.

Worst of all, the very existence of the outposts--and particularly their
success in defying removal by the Israel Defense Forces and the Israeli
government--tells us who really controls the West Bank lands outside the
Palestinian cities and villages. And that is a scandal by any measure of
sovereignty and good government.

Yet for now no more attempts should be made to remove the outposts. They
should be isolated, cut off from electricity and water and "starved" in
every possible way, but no more attempts should be made to remove them
by force. The reasons are both operational and political.

At the operational level, the IDF has simply proven unable to remove the
outposts with anything approaching permanency. At most, a container or
two are removed by 1,000 soldiers in the face of curses, spitting and
even violence on the part of a few hundred fanatical settlers--who then
proceed to bring more containers to the same deserted hilltop and
reestablish their outpost. This performance brings neither honor nor
dignity to the IDF, to say the least, and neutralizes whatever deterrent
value the operation was supposed to exercise vis-a-vis the extremist
settlers.

The problem is that, once the outpost is removed, the territory on which
it was established remains in Israeli hands, i.e., in the hands of the
extremists who live nearby, and who have greater familiarity with the
terrain and more control over it than the soldiers. This drawback can
only be negated by turning the territory over to the Palestinian
Authority and its security forces and/or by physically fencing off the
territory and separating it from Israel.

This is precisely what the Gaza and northern West Bank disengagements
are designed to do. Once they are implemented, any settler who tries to
go back and rebuild, say, Netzarim, will encounter both a fence
patrolled by the IDF (proving that from the Palestinian standpoint the
fence can be useful) and the presence of Palestinians at the Netzarim
site. Hopefully, after Gaza will come the turn of West Bank lands in
which there are outposts. Then their removal will be final.

Turning to the political arena, Prime Minister Sharon's disengagement
plan is moving ahead with great difficulty on account of settler and
settler-inspired opposition, both violent and parliamentary. Whatever we
may think or make of Sharon's motives, and even assuming that the
failure to remove outposts in the West Bank also reflects a certain lack
of determination on his part, he is clearly intent on implementing
disengagement.

This is the first positive move against the settlement enterprise in
nearly four decades, and every effort must be made to facilitate it. In
this context, clumsy and often futile attempts to remove outposts on the
West Bank are a distraction, if not downright counterproductive in terms
of the government's ability to recruit the necessary support for
disengagement on the political right.

Of course, one could argue that a government and an army and police
force that are incapable of removing two containers from a lonely West
Bank hilltop will never be able to remove 21 settlements with their
8,000 residents, regardless of who takes over the land and where the
fences lie. But if that is indeed the case, then better to come to grips
with the consequences--that the settlers have won the day and in their
messianic fervor have driven the state of Israel into a South African
situation without a South African solution--in the clear-cut instance of
trying to remove the Gaza Strip settlements rather than in confronting
the West Bank outposts.

Let's hope it doesn't get to that.

