Q: How do you view the constraints that the United States is
trying to place on Israel's freedom of action during the countdown to
its invasion of Iraq and during the war there? How will the radical
actors in the region react?

A: Prior to the operation, the Americans want to be allowed to build
an international consensus, to pass resolutions in Congress and the
Security Council. They need peace and quiet. Thus it's easy to
understand how any incident that disturbs the peace annoys them. If and
when they begin the operation, well, the dice are cast and the situation
changes. It will be hard for anyone on the outside to disturb them.
Since this time, unlike in '91, there is no coalition with the Arabs,
extremist elements cannot disrupt it. Accordingly an operation by, say,
Hizballah in the north during the war will not go without a response.

Q: Yet Israel exercised restraint and did not respond to
Lebanon's pumping of water from the sources of the Jordan River.

A: Regarding water, Israel appears to have shown restraint without
any American demand, due to considerations of its own. But clearly we
are not ignoring this; whether we respond during the American operation
in Iraq or after it is a tactical issue. In any event, in '91 everything
was quiet in our region during the war in Iraq, and I'm inclined to
believe that this time we'll see a repeat performance. The extremists
will understand that this is war, and "a la guerre comme a la guerre;"
they won't be disruptive.

Q: In your assessment, will the US succeed in its war against
Iraq? And if so, how will it act in our region after victory?

A: I find it hard to imagine an American failure. In the event of
victory, the probably scenario is that the administration will not seek
to force a solution on us. It sees in Israel a long-term ally. Everyone
will line up with the Americans except anomalies like Hizballah and
Hamas; everyone will understand that we have reached the end of
extremism. Predictions of loss of control and anarchy in the region are
not realistic. We already see a change in the American attitude toward
the legitimacy of the Arab regimes. The regimes and leaders will change.

This development already applies to Arafat. He's on the way out. If the
Americans succeed in Iraq the Palestinians will recognize the change and
remove him. There are already Palestinians who demand to change course;
a successful American operation in Iraq will amplify those voices. After
the war we'll witness a gradual Palestinian moderation, moving toward an
accommodation, in the sense of institutionalization of relations and
coexistence.

Q: Will removal of Saddam Hussein end the Intifada?

A: I'd be surprised if it brought about an end to Palestinian
frustrations and the Intifada. If the Americans succeed in Iraq and a
liberal, democratic regime emerges, this will affect the Palestinian
leadership and temper the conflict. But I don't see a direct connection
between American success in Iraq and the problems that constitute the
root cause of the war being waged here for two years.

Q: The Americans presented Prime Minister Sharon in
Washington with a "road map" for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement
within 3 to 4 years. They are also working within the "Quartet" to
coordinate a solution. Some speculate that they'll try to impose a
solution after Iraq.

A: The Americans may indeed devote more time to dealing with our
conflict. But some parties have illusions regarding what we can expect
in Israeli-American relations after the operation in Iraq. I don't
anticipate brutal pressure. Within the Quartet, the American attitude
toward us does not resemble that of the other members, such as the
European Union, which is fairly hostile toward us. Within the
administration there is now broad agreement regarding the way to deal
with Iraq, including Secretary of State Powell; this is not the case
regarding the Israeli-Palestinian conflict following the Iraq operation,
because it is still beyond the horizon.

Q: Do you think the US has formulated a model solution to our
conflict following the war in Iraq?

A: Right now we are hearing from President Bush about those areas
where it appears to him there is a common denominator, such as a
Palestinian state and ceasing settlement expansion. But there's a
difference between the fairly obvious things he says today and what
he'll present after the prime minister of Israel explains the dangers to
him. At least regarding this administration it is an illusion to think
that following the operation in Iraq it will appear as a neutral arbiter
between Israel and the Palestinians.

