The statement on the wall that was made a few days ago by Israeli
Defense Minister Shaul Mofaz revealed Israel's true intentions and
confirmed the suspicions of the Palestinian side. Mofaz said explicitly
that this unilateral disengagement project will allow Israel further to
expand and consolidate settlements in the West Bank. The Palestinians
have always understood that the disengagement plan provided certain
withdrawals in the Gaza Strip in return for gains for West Bank settlers.

The wall Israel has been building in the West Bank is a main component
of that unilateral disengagement project. The wall is in fact part of
the ongoing Israeli settlement expansion strategy that includes East
Jerusalem, which is considered by the Palestinians, under international
law, and in the official position of almost every country in the world
to be part of the Palestinian occupied territories.

Consequently, the Israeli Jewish presence in East Jerusalem is part of
the Israelis' illegal settlement expansion policy. The wall is being
built in a way that is based on political and demographic considerations
more than security ones. It is simply trying to separate the Palestinian
populated areas from the Palestinian areas that are settled illegally by
Jewish settlers in order to create political facts on the ground and
prejudge the final status negotiations.

This is especially clear in the case of the wall in Jerusalem, which
follows a path that is clearly based on demographic and political
considerations rather than security. It is mostly separating Palestinian
occupied areas from other Palestinian occupied areas.

The Israelis' apparent rationale is to create a new geographic
definition of Jerusalem. The wall intends to create a new boundary with
a Jewish majority inside and Palestinian populated parts of Jerusalem
outside. The economic and humanitarian effects of the wall are also
significant, because it goes through intensely populated areas and
disrupts the movement of hundreds of thousands of Palestinians to work,
schools, hospitals, etc.

This conflict has been continuing and intensifying mainly as a result of
the oppression of the Palestinian people. This wall is only about
further injustice. It is accompanied by seizing, closing, or
confiscating more Palestinian land and expanding illegal Jewish
settlements. It also increases the humiliation and suffering of the
Palestinian people, whose standard of living is deteriorating as a result.

If Israel is trying to inflame the conflict by building this wall, then
it is making no mistakes. In contrast, the way to deescalate the
conflict and violence is only by understanding and recognizing the
legal, political, and human needs of the Palestinian people through
completely ending this occupation, including its settlements, and
tearing down its walls.

