From a Palestinian perspective, as well as from the perspective of
international law, to distinguish between settlements and the
settlements known as outposts is neither here nor there. All of
them--whether the large and long-established Ma'ale Adumim settlement
bloc that tries to encircle Jerusalem and reaches down into the Jordan
Valley almost splitting the West Bank in two, to any small caravan moved
onto a hilltop overnight and to which the Israeli army winds up
providing protection--are illegal, an obstruction to a peace based on
two states, and a crime of the military occupation.

International law as embodied by the Fourth Geneva Convention states
quite clearly that it is forbidden for an occupying power to move, in
whole or in part, its civilian population into occupied territory. That
law could have been written with Israel and its settlement policy in the
West Bank and Gaza in mind. It was of course written as a logical
consequence of the most important axiom of international law: that it is
forbidden for any state to acquire territory through military conquest.

Nevertheless, on both a practical level and a political level, the
outposts have become an issue separate from the overall settlement
issue. The Palestinian position on all settlements is constant. On the
Israeli side, however, the law that "allows" Israel to build settlements
in the occupied territories in the face of international law does not
apply to settlement outposts. In other words, even by Israeli law they
are illegal.

The outposts are also a direct transgression of the Sharon government's
obligations to the US government. Both domestically and diplomatically
there would seem to be enough incentive as well as a legal framework to
make the Israeli government force these outposts out.

On a practical level, too, the issue would appear to be one that can be
addressed immediately. Outposts consist of mobile trailers. They can be
placed quickly. They can be removed quickly. Furthermore, the Israeli
army prides itself on preventing Palestinians from crossing the green
line. Logic would dictate that the army should be equally good at
preventing Israelis from doing so too, thus re-establishing outposts as
they have done the few times an Israeli government has made a
half-hearted attempt at removing them. Logic would dictate.

But then logic would dictate that we ought to be talking about when
settlements, all settlements, are removed, rather then if. Logic would
dictate that an Israeli government that professes itself in favor of a
two-state solution would be acting swiftly and decisively against
further settlement activities to prevent a situation in which a
two-state solution is unfeasible, as is currently the case due to the
existence of settlements and outposts.

Logic would dictate that at a time when there is a ceasefire, when we
are supposed to be moving in the direction of peaceful negotiations to
end the conflict, to create two states, the Israeli government would do
all in its power to ensure that confidence is built between the two
sides. Logic would dictate that one of the most obvious
confidence-building measures would be the removal of these settlement
outposts as a first step to prove that, indeed, the Israeli government
is interested in a viable agreement.

But that logic is a logic that aims at a peaceful end to the conflict.
The logic that wants to maintain and consolidate the occupation, the
logic of war, says otherwise. Settlement outposts and the settlers in
them not only receive the protection of the Israeli army, they are
afforded paved roads, electricity and water. Few attempts have been made
to remove them, and those few attempts have been thwarted by the
immediate re-establishment of such outposts.

The Israeli government may be in a tight political spot when it comes to
acting against a vocal and extreme settler minority in Israel. But it is
the role of third countries to ease that pressure by applying stronger
pressure the other way. That way an Israeli government would be left
with no choice. The Quartet's roadmap, international law, understandings
between Washington and Tel Aviv all point in one direction: settlement
outposts must be removed. To do so sooner rather than later is an
important first step in establishing trust between the two parties that
ultimately must negotiate an end to this conflict.

