Israel's wall in East Jerusalem slices through Palestinian communities
and Palestinian lives like a dagger.

Since 1967, Israeli policy in East Jerusalem has been designed to
encourage Jewish Israeli settlement and to decrease the number of
Palestinian residents through a series of punitive building and
residency laws that are only applied to non-Jews. The wall excises
Palestinian communities from the landscape of East Jerusalem, containing
them in isolated, disconnected ghettos.

By the time the Jerusalem wall is completed, more than 90 percent of the
East Jerusalem district will be absorbed by Israel. About 250,000
Palestinians will be stranded in walled enclosures and cut off from both
East Jerusalem and other urban centers. They will lose access to
schools, universities, medical facilities, the Haram al-Sharif and
Church of the Holy Sepulchre--and each other.

The 15,000 Jerusalem residents who live in Qalandia and Kufr Aqab, which
are north of the wall, are likely to lose their Jerusalem residency
rights altogether. To the northwest, the wall imprisons Bir Nabala,
Judeira, Jib, and the old city of Beit Hanina (combined population
14,000). The southern part of the wall cuts off Bethlehem, Beit Sahour,
Beit Jala, and their refugee camps (comb. pop. 170,000) from East
Jerusalem and from the central and northern West Bank. It also imprisons
the 1,600 residents of Walaja.

Since 1967, the stated policy of the Jerusalem Municipality has been to
create a ratio of 78 Jews for every 28 Palestinians. So the Municipality
confiscated land from Palestinians and made it available only to Jews,
revoked the residency rights of Palestinians (but not Jews) and required
that they continually prove their rights, denied building permits only
to Palestinian residents, and demolished illegally built Palestinian
homes. The Jerusalem wall ratchets up this policy by carving Palestinian
communities out of East Jerusalem and making it impossible for people to
conduct the activities of everyday life.

Palestinians in the town of al Ram between East Jerusalem and Ramallah
(and east of the wall) will lose their livelihoods as the result of the
wall. Al Ram's population grew to 60,000 with the influx of Jerusalem
residents who were unable to build homes in East Jerusalem. It became a
lively hub of transportation between the two larger cities. Now,
however, the wall slices through al Ram and encircles most of the town,
killing work opportunities.

More fundamentally, the wall creates a labyrinthine maze residents must
negotiate to cross even trivial distances. In August 2003, I met Fatima
Assad, a schoolteacher who lives in Qalandia and works in East
Jerusalem, who told me how the fragment of the wall that was in place
when we met changed her seven kilometer commute into a two to three hour
daily ordeal, much of it spent on foot.

It is a scene that is becoming all too familiar throughout the occupied
territories. If the wall is completed as planned, 43.5% of the West Bank
will be annexed to Israel. When one considers the implications of the
wall in the context of the network of bypass roads (for Israeli settlers
only), access roads (restricting entry to Palestinian towns to one or
two gated roads that are locked overnight), and more than 480
checkpoints that make travel between Palestinian towns nearly
impossible, it becomes clear that the West Bank has been divided into
impoverished cantons subdivided into ghettos. This can only be described
as a policy of ethnic cleansing.

The course of the wall was defined, not to prevent suicide bombings (an
argument that would have been hard to refute had the wall been built on
the green line) but rather to inflict the maximum amount of damage on
Palestinian society. The wall implements what Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon stated (as reported by /The Times/ on August 24, 1988) as his
preference: "You don't simply bundle people onto trucks and drive them
away. . . . I prefer to advocate a positive policy, to create, in
effect, a condition that in a positive way will induce people to leave."

What legitimate security needs are met by Israel's demand that
Palestinians in the "seam area" (that is, those who find themselves west
of the wall) secure permits from Israeli military authorities simply to
live in their own homes? If Israeli security is the issue, what is the
justification for separating Palestinian communities from each other?
How are Israelis more secure when the 40,000 residents of Qalqilya,
surrounded on all sides by an eight meter high wall, are denied a view
of the sunset?

The Israeli political establishment seems to believe that if it stomps
long and hard enough on the Palestinians, they will forego their
national and political rights. So Israel bulldozed Jenin and Nablus and
more recently Rafah. This policy is sterile and ultimately will fail.
How much longer will the Israeli public and Israel's supporters abroad
accept Israel's predatory definition of its security needs?

My main concern is how much longer Palestinians will have to spend their
time, energies, and creativity just finding ways to survive and maintain
their sense of dignity in the face of Israel's relentless attacks. No
people should be so cruelly tested.

