Q: How would Hamas assess the progress and advantages of
the ceasefire at this time?

A: Up to this moment, Israel has violated all of the conditions
of the ceasefire, continuing with its killing, its demolition of houses
and refusing to release the prisoners. Still, the Palestinian people
remain committed to the ceasefire one hundred percent. We are watching
the Israeli side, recording what the Israelis are saying and doing, and
if it becomes necessary, we will return to an effective armed struggle.

Q: Under what conditions will the ceasefire be discontinued?

A: First, there is the three-month deadline, which we are
sticking to. Second, if Israel were to carry out a massive violation,
such as an invasion or dramatic killing, then we would have to consider
ending the ceasefire.

Q: Do you maintain the public's support in this?

A: We have the public's support; we even maintain the support of
the international community. The European Union has even decided not to
consider Hamas a terrorist organization.

Q: How would you assess the government of Prime Minister
Mahmoud Abbas and the progress on the roadmap
                                                ?

A: As of yet, this Palestinian government has been unable to
achieve the base demands of Palestinians. This government is working
hard, but has nothing to show for it yet. To my mind, if Mahmoud Abbas
can't produce the basic requirements demanded by the Palestinian people,
he will resign.

Q: Why is the prisoner issue so important, even though it
is not a part of the roadmap?

A: This is one of the tender points in Palestinian society. Since
this Israeli government has taken office, it has slowly deprived as many
as 70 basic rights from the prisoners. They are not allowed visits from
their families and lawyers, they live off of the food given them by
their families, and their clothes are those that their families have
sent for them. They have been prevented from living as human beings.
Therefore, the release of these prisoners is one of the most important
demands of the Palestinian people.

Israel has said that it will release some prisoners, but we will not be
deceived. We have lists and we are ready to give the names of those we
want released. We will not be tricked. If the Israeli government is
going to mislead us on this issue, the response will be a violent one
and we will return to the effective armed struggle.

Q: Does Hamas ever imagine a time when it will be in the
Palestinian government and the only parties carrying weapons on
Palestinian streets will be the Palestinian police?

A: Yes, when our land is liberated. When we achieve sovereignty,
we will demand free elections. If the Palestinian people vote for Hamas
in the elections, then we will be in the government--not in an
autonomy--but in a sovereign Palestinian state. At that time, the
Palestinian army will carry guns and will defend the Palestinian
borders, not like now where the Palestinian police are expected to spy
on their own people for Israel.

