The possibility of dramatic developments in Iraq and their consequences
for the Palestinian people and cause are one of the foremost reasons for
Palestinian anxiety these days.

The concern is felt on three levels. The first is the immediate impact
of such a diversion on the international community, likely minimizing
any efforts towards solving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and the
needs of the Palestinian people. Also, Palestinians fear that Israeli
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon--already known for his criminal record--will
exploit this situation in order to increase his ongoing killings of
Palestinians (and a dramatic number of civilians), as well as other
collective punishment. Some Palestinians fear that Sharon may go as far
as implementing any one of the Israeli population transfer plans,
starting with those dreamed up at the infamous Herzliya conference.

That process may take different forms such as direct forced population
transfer (i.e., ethnic cleansing) of Palestinians to areas outside the
West Bank and Gaza Strip, or from one part of the territories to the
other. It may even include transferring Palestinians with Israeli
citizenship into the occupied Palestinian territories.

Or we may see the implementation of indirect transfer through the
terrorizing of the civilian population to such an extent that they are
forced to leave (a method implemented by Jewish forces and terrorist
groups in 1948). An article by the Associated Press this week described
how the actions of Jewish settlers over the last four years have forced
the six remaining families of Yanoun village in the West Bank to leave
their land and homes and flee to another village. The prospect of
transfer is not so far removed as one may think.

The second level of concern over a war in Iraq is the threat of
postponement of international attention to the conflict. This concern is
evident today in the current dispute between Europeans and Arab
diplomats--who want to see an immediate implementation of the first
phase of the "Quartet" roadmap--and the Americans who want to prepare
that roadmap for post-war implementation.

The third area of concern for Palestinians is the strategic effect of a
war in Iraq. Eventually the Arabs will be strategically weakened, while
Israel, vocally siding with and aiding the Americans, will be strengthened.

For now, the Palestinian strategy for handling these threats is to
concentrate on warning the outside world of the possibility that Israel
will exploit any war, simultaneously trying to get guarantees via the
Europeans and from the Americans to stay Israel's hand in increasing
atrocities against Palestinians. Another tack has been to try to
convince the Europeans to deploy some kind of European presence in the
Palestinian territories to deter Israeli actions. There are also efforts
being made to raise Palestinian public awareness to avoid the kind of
activities that may be used by Israel as an excuse for its military plans.

There have been hints and low-level official remarks from the United
States that after the war Israelis and Palestinians should expect the US
to activate its role and revive the peace process, including a possible
repetition of the Madrid conference that launched American and
international intervention after the first Gulf War in 1991.
Palestinians are very skeptical of this possibility and see significant
differences between the two periods.

Then, the results of the war left President Bush Sr. strong and free
from internal political factors, including pressure from Jewish and
right-wing lobby groups for Israel. This time, such strength cannot be
expected, while those lobbies seem to be sitting in the administration
itself. The other difference from a decade ago is the current makeup of
the Israeli government and its prime minister, who belong to an ideology
and political strategy completely incompatible with the notion on which
the peace process was established, i.e. land for peace.

As such, international efforts should concentrate on warning Israel now
against any attacks against Palestinians during the war and moving
quickly into developing and implementing at least the preliminary phases
of whatever plan the "Quartet" is promoting after consulting with both
parties.

