The separation fence is today at the center of public debate. Ultimately
it will constitute a physical barrier between us and the Palestinians.
Many people are in favor of its construction. The terrorist acts of
recent years inside the green line generated an understanding among
ourselves and the Palestinians that even if the two peoples are destined
one day to live peacefully side by side--for the present they have to
separate.

The debate that produces almost daily protests, demonstrations,
disturbances, violent attacks, and appeals to the High Court of Justice
is not about the necessity for the barrier--but rather its location. In
many instances the barrier creates gross injustices and humanitarian and
economic problems. It separates people from their land and source of
income, families from their communities, students from their
institutions of learning, the ill from their physicians, entire
populations from the center of their lives. But when we speak of the
barrier in Jerusalem, what is called the Jerusalem envelope, we
encounter all these dilemmas and something else: stupidity.

In June 1967, shortly after the Six-Day War, the Government of Israel
decided to expand the borders of Jerusalem. A small city encompassing 38
square kilometers all told became a large metropolis of 108 sq. km.
Overnight Jerusalem became the biggest city in Israel in terms of both
expanse and population.

Then in the early 1970s, the government added two important decisions.
One was to build new neighborhoods in the annexed parts of the city and
encourage Jews from around the country and the world to establish their
homes there. The second was a directive to municipal planners to design
their long-term plans so as to maintain the 1967 demographic ratio
within the city of 74.2 percent Jews and 25.8 percent Arabs (figures
from the Jerusalem Institute of Israel Studies). This directive
constituted a green light for the planning and building authorities,
Jerusalem Municipality, and Ministry of Interior to limit construction
plans for Jerusalem Arabs and to reduce, to the greatest extent
possible, the areas allotted for building.

One of the default options left open to Jerusalem Arabs was to build
their homes outside the new city limits, but close enough so that
Jerusalem would continue to constitute the center of their lives.
Thousands of Palestinian families were pushed toward this option and
built their homes outside the city limits, but only a few minutes' drive
from its center. Indeed the Ministry of Housing, in close cooperation
with the Jerusalem Municipality and with the aid of mortgages from the
Bank of Jerusalem, offered Jerusalem Arabs an additional incentive--an
offer they could not refuse: buy a new home in al Azaria next to
Jerusalem and enhance your standard of living.

Jerusalem Arabs who seized this opportunity were reassured by the
Ministry and the Municipality that none of their privileges as residents
of the State of Israel--social security allowances, health insurance,
Israeli ID, etc.--would in any way be curtailed. So successful was the
scheme that a second, "build your own house" phase was declared in al
Azaria. Once again the issue of residents' rights was raised, and once
again assurances were provided that all residency privileges would be
maintained. So again many hurried to exploit the mortgage bargains being
offered by the bank, purchased lots, and built new homes.

To this day, thousands of Palestinian families have left Jerusalem in
this way at their own initiative. To a large extent, the Israeli
authorities have remained faithful to their commitment not to detract
from the rights of East Jerusalem Arabs who moved their dwellings to
parts of the West Bank adjacent to Jerusalem, even though according to
the letter of the law, these families (residents but not citizens of
Israel, whose lives still focus on Jerusalem) have left Israel and no
longer enjoy the same privileges as the rest of Israel's residents.

Here we come to the separation fence. The barrier, currently being
constructed energetically, will create a sad new reality. Thousands of
Palestinian families whose lives center on Jerusalem but who built homes
beyond the municipal borders will now find themselves cut off from the
city. The merchant whose business is in East Jerusalem, the clerk or
social worker employed by the Municipality, the children who study at
schools run by the Municipality and Ministry of Education, the employee
of a Jerusalem Arab or Jewish business--all are Jerusalem residents, all
continue to pay their taxes and social security charges to the Israeli
authorities and to receive social security pensions, and all will
discover that they have in effect left Jerusalem permanently and are
completely cut off from the center of their lives.

Thus far the injustice. Where is the stupidity? We have noted that the
government of Israel wanted to preserve the same demographic ratio
between Jews and Arabs as in 1967 and instructed its planners
accordingly. Now, as a consequence of the physical barrier going up
between Jerusalem and the adjacent West Bank neighborhoods, thousands of
Palestinian families that live outside the city in nearby suburbs are
beginning to return to the city. Since Jerusalem cannot satisfy all
their housing needs, they will live in poor and crowded conditions--so
long as they can live in Jerusalem.

And what has happened to the demographic ratio? The Israeli government's
dream of maintaining the 1967 proportion between Jews and Arabs is no
longer valid. The ratio is changing. The government, which wanted a
solid Jewish majority in the city, is liable to wake up to a very
different reality.

