"There are no sacred dates," declared the late Yitzhak Rabin. To the
extent that it is up to them, it appears that Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon and Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen)
happily embrace this insight.

More than two months after Israel and the Palestinian Authority accepted
the Bush administration's roadmap
                                                , things are moving
slowly. Both sides are dragging their feet along the path charted by the
experts in Washington, each constantly eyeing the other to make sure it
is not lingering too far back. And since the Americans are in any case
preoccupied with an escalating dilemma in Iraq, the chances are slim
that a genuine effort will be made in the near term to actually compel
Israel and the Palestinians to obey the administration's detailed
instructions quickly and completely.

What has been achieved thus far should not be taken lightly. June 2003
is to date the quietest month since the second intifada began;
incitement in the Palestinian media has almost stopped; and Israel has
evacuated parts of the Gaza Strip and the Bethlehem area. But a measured
examination of the main components of phase I of the roadmap indicates
that it is still early even to give the two sides a passing grade.

/Security./ The biggest success of the process is without doubt the
declaration of a ceasefire or hudna--which officially is not even part
of the process. Terrorist attacks this month have killed three Israelis,
but in general the ceasefire is being maintained. Order has been
restored to most regions, and the daily rate of live fire incidents has
dropped by more than half, to between two and five. Those attacks that
have taken place were perpetrated by what the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) Intelligence Directorate calls "Fateh dissidents", members of
local Tanzim gangs in the northern West Bank, a rebellious Islamic Jihad
cell in Jenin and members of the "popular resistance committees" who
abandoned Fateh in the southern Gaza Strip. There the Palestinian
Authority (PA) is hesitant to use force as long as the West Bank is
still largely under Israeli security responsibility; senior Fateh
officials argue that a cessation of IDF roundups of suspects there would
reduce the rebels' concern for their personal security and culminate in
a reduction in attacks.

But the more significant issue involves the dismantling of the terrorist
organizations' infrastructure. Here the PA has done nearly nothing.
Instead of arrests, terrorist militants were summoned to "warning
talks," even as the PA clarified that it had no intention of settling
accounts with suspects regarding past attacks. The diverse organizations
are permitted for the time being to hold onto their weapons, while the
commitment to unify the security branches into three roof organizations,
all under Abu Mazen's authority, has encountered, as anticipated, strong
resistance on the part of Yasir Arafat, to whom at least half the
security units continue to report.

/The humanitarian situation./ Accordingly, Israel too is delaying
implementation of its commitments. In the Gaza Strip, soldiers'
open-fire orders have been restricted and the trip from Gaza City to
Rafah has been reduced from 5-6 hours to 20 minutes. But in most areas
of the West Bank nothing has changed. Most Palestinian cities remain
surrounded, entrances to villages are blockaded and road travel is
forbidden. Only some 20,000 Palestinians (mostly the fortunate from the
Gaza Strip and Bethlehem) are permitted to work in Israel. For the time
being Israel is delaying any discussion of additional withdrawals to the
September 28, 2000 lines. And without such withdrawals the living
conditions for around half the Palestinians are simply impossible.

/Prisoner release./ While this issue is not included in the roadmap, it
is the most substantive of all for Palestinians. At this point Israel is
prepared to release only some 350 out of around 6,000 prisoners it
holds. Sharon, under American pressure, agreed to include a few dozen
Hamas and Islamic Jihad detainees who have no "blood on their hands."
Without a more massive release it is doubtful whether it will be
possible to gain the Palestinian public's support for the process.

/Outposts./ Israel's performance on this issue borders on the
ridiculous. One outpost, Mitzpe Yitzhar, was evacuated despite a
confrontation between the IDF and the settlers, and around five were
evacuated by agreement--while more than ten new outposts have been
established in their place. The government shied away from touching
dozens of additional outposts, and probably won't in the future either.

In briefing talks with IDF officers, Chief of Staff Moshe Yaalon has
advocated following two rules in ongoing contacts with the PA:
meticulous insistence on the Palestinians maintaining their security
commitments, alongside a display of generosity and even calculated risks
with regard to enhancing living conditions for Palestinians. Of these
two rules, the Israeli political echelon appears to have opted to adopt
only the first.

In the coming months the roadmap will face its real test: the
dismantling of terrorist infrastructure by the PA, and ongoing IDF
redeployments from designated areas. Success in these two parameters is
likely to produce a half-year extension of the ceasefire. Meanwhile,
while it is too early to conclude that the American initiative has
failed, it is still held hostage by too many lunatic elements. It has
not yet developed an internal logic of its own that can edge the two
sides forward. The main problems are trust in the other side's
intentions--which has almost disappeared--and of course the gaps
separating the two sides' positions regarding final status issues (the
future of the settlements, Jerusalem, the right of return). At least
under the present leaders these appear unbridgeable.

