We are apparently entering a strange and quite unique era. It seems
virtually certain that sometime in the coming months the United States
will attack Iraq. Its war objectives will be removal of the Saddam
Hussein regime, disarming the country and establishing a democratic,
moderate system of government. Most observers agree that the US will
succeed at least in realizing its goals of removing the regime and
disarming Iraq, and that this will be an event of great significance for
the Middle East.

Yet beyond this rather generalized consensus, we can only speculate on
what will happen--in effect, what form that significance will take. The
questions fill several categories. For example, the fate of Iraq: can it
be truly democratized? Will regional rebellions cause it to
disintegrate? Or the behavior of neighboring states: will Syria and
Iran, for example, be so overwhelmed by the US display of power and the
new American presence that they will moderate their policies? Or
America's behavior: does the US have the "staying power" to supervise a
rebuilding of Iraqi political society that could take years? And so on
and on. It is clear that something momentous is about to happen, yet
there are far more questions than answers. Hence the coming months can
only be termed a "revolutionary situation."

When the speculation touches on the Israeli-Palestinian sphere, there is
only slightly more certainty. In order to enhance its freedom of
maneuver in the Arab world in preparation for an attack against Iraq,
the US has asked Israel to exercise restraint vis-a-vis provocations by
its neighbors--whether Iraq, Hizballah or Palestinians. But how will
those neighbors react?

The countdown to Iraq finds the Palestinian Authority and the Palestine
Liberation Organization already in a period of soul-searching regarding
their course of action over the past two years; far-reaching reforms are
being urged upon them, while Israel's military response and reoccupation
have taken a heavy toll. It stands to reason that the Palestinian
mainstream will seek in the coming months to reduce violent attacks on
Israelis, in the hope that it will "win points" with the US in the
post-Iraq era. But as we have seen, mainstream Fatah leaders have proven
capable in recent months of gross miscalculations, such as the Karine A
affair and adopting the tactic of suicide bombings. Hence we cannot rule
out the possibility that Arafat or one of his followers will conclude
that, with Israel's hands voluntarily tied, this is the time to carry
out new and provocative acts of terrorism.

The extremist organizations, led by Hamas and Islamic Jihad, presumably
will have no compunctions about continuing to attack; the question is
one of capabilities, not intentions. This raises the possibility that,
despite American admonitions, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon will respond
to further Hamas terrorist activity in Gaza by deepening Israeli
incursions, with the ultimate goal of reoccupying the entire Gaza Strip.
That this is Sharon's objective seems fairly certain; whether Hamas will
provide the provocation, and whether Sharon will risk the wrath of the
administration by carrying out the operation during the countdown period
or during the actual war in Iraq, remains uncertain. On the other hand,
Palestinian and Jordanian fears of Israeli "transfer" are simply without
foundation.

An additional factor affecting both Palestinian and Israeli behavior is
the response of Hizballah and its backers, Syria and Iran, during the
waiting period and the actual war in Iraq, and the response of Iraq
itself. Provocative attacks on Israel's north by Hizballah, and/or
missile attacks by Iraq, would be intended to distract and disrupt
American war efforts. Precisely for this reason, Israel would come under
heavy American pressure to exercise total restraint; it would seek to
comply, unless losses become too heavy and/or Iraq employs
nonconventional weaponry. But radical Palestinian elements, including
within the PLO, might see Hizballah or Iraqi attacks as both an
opportunity and an obligation, out of solidarity, to attack Israel
themselves.

Israel is and will be cheering on the American effort, while the
sentiments of the Palestinian population, as well as its key
institutions, will be with Saddam Hussein and his regime and against the
US. During the 1991 Gulf War this situation produced a heavy Israeli
curfew in the territories, and the image of Palestinians "dancing on the
roofs" as Scud missiles fell on Israel. Then, the Intifada was based
essentially on low-level violence, and around one hundred thousand
Palestinians continued to work in Israel before and after the war. Now,
in view of the events of the past two years, some Palestinians may
reason that they have far less to lose by identifying actively with the
Iraqi cause, while other Palestinians may feel that after having lost so
much, it's time for a different approach.

The Bush administration is going to some lengths to show the Arab world,
and particularly Palestinians, that it has a plan or "road map" for
solving the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in the months and years beyond
Iraq. Theoretically this could influence and moderate both Palestinian
and Israeli behavior. Yet the problem is that none of the relevant
leaders--Sharon, Arafat and Bush himself--seems truly to have adopted a
realistic and determined strategy for peace, and this remains painfully
clear to the peoples and the leaders of the region.

