Saeed Talib is an American citizen and a West Bank farmer. Neither is
standing him in good stead at the moment. He has not been able to tend
to his land in the village of Turmus Ayya on the road north to Nablus
for four years, and he is afforded no legal recourse from any quarter.

Some six years ago, a settlement outpost was established near the
village. The settler who first drove up his caravan on an empty hilltop
has since become notorious. All the villagers know him as Boaz. He is no
longer alone.

Now, some 50 caravans stand beside his. According to Israeli law, these
settlement outposts are illegal. But the Israeli government has
nevertheless provided them with paved roads, electricity and running water.

Saeed and his fellow villagers have been allowed onto their land for
only a few days a year since the intifada began. These are during the
October-November olive harvest season. The farmers are desperate. Two
days a year, only to harvest, is neither here nor there. For the rest of
the year they are prevented from tending their land, from planting
seedlings or from weeding and trimming.

Before the intifada, farmers used to defy the settlers. There were many
confrontations and arguments. Just before the intifada broke out, Boaz
awoke to find his herd of sheep gone and his dogs dead.

He strolled into another nearby village al-Mughayyer, and hung up
leaflets in Hebrew. The leaflets warned the villagers that if he was not
compensated $1,500 per dog and his sheep were not returned within 24
hours, he, Boaz, would cut down 700 trees. No money and no sheep were
forthcoming. The next day, Boaz returned with an armed gang and in the
presence of the Israeli army cut down 700 trees. Months later, villagers
reported that his sheep had been found in the Jordan Valley, and his
purpose had been to claim compensation.

The violence doesn't stop. On the outskirts of another nearby village,
Sinjel, settlers from Ma'ale Levona erected caravans the Israeli
government now describes as "semi-illegal", or "scheduled to become
legal". These settlers' wont is to burn down wheat fields every summer.
Last summer 50 dunams were thus laid to waste before the villagers could
put out the fire. To protect these settlers, the Israeli army built a
camp next to the outpost. Every one knows that one day, that camp will
be filled with more settlers.

During the intifada, confronting the settlers has become far too
dangerous for the farmers. There is little direct contact. Villagers
have been warned to stay at a distance of 1,000 to 1,500 meters from the
"borders" of any settlement or outpost. Any closer and they are shot at,
sometimes wounded and sometimes killed. The settlers are above the law.
People are shot, their fields are burned and their machinery or houses
damaged. The settler is the king of the West Bank.

When Saeed went to harvest olives on the two days he was allowed onto
his land he was shot at. His car was burned. Settlers came to chase him
away. He told them he would call the police. One shouted back at him:
"I'll give you my number. I am the police. I am the army." The settler
is king.

According to international law, all settlements are illegal. According
to Israeli law, the outposts, established without prior planning with
the Israeli army, are illegal. This illegality, however, has become a
means for the army to avoid confronting outpost settlers. They simply
don't apply the law.

Outposts have a habit of multiplying and expanding. They have a habit of
becoming permanent. They are the biggest provocation faced by ordinary
people on the ground. On the same day as the signing of the Oslo
Accords, a concerted Israeli drive to multiply settlements and outposts
in the West Bank in particular was set in motion. The number of settlers
doubled between 1993 and 2000. The signal to the average Palestinian was
unmistakable. While Israeli officials smiled on TV they took more land
on the ground.

At a time of some confidence between the two sides, it took a while
before this obvious transgression of the spirit if not the letter of the
Oslo Accords was translated into direct anger.

Now, after the latest intifada, very much sparked by anger at the
continued settlement expansions and the flourishing of settlement
outposts, there is no confidence. If Israel wants to persuade any
Palestinian that it is serious about peace, that it is serious about two
states, then these outposts must be removed. People no longer believe
fine words. People want results on the ground.

I am not hopeful. In the West Bank, the settler remains king.

