The process of finding a successor to the late President Yasser Arafat
will culminate on January 9, and it is with a great deal of pride that
the Palestinian people look forward to these elections.

And for good reason. Elections, a somewhat unusual practice in the Arab
world, seem to be taken for granted by all Palestinians, whether among
the general public or the political elite. And while one reason for this
is the constitutional obligation to hold presidential elections, another
important reason is that in the absence of a personality that can fill
the shoes of such a charismatic and historical political leader as
Arafat, Palestinians are looking to political institutions and legal
processes to fill part of the vacancy he left behind.

However, holding elections requires more than just Palestinian readiness
and a decree from the interim president. Requirements apply to other
parties that are no less important. Specifically, Israel, having by
force retaken control over most of the Palestinian territories, needs to
fulfill three basic requirements for elections to be possible as well as
free and democratic:

First, the Palestinian people should enjoy the natural right of free
movement, free political expression and free political organization.

Second, there has to be complete Palestinian Authority control over all
PA areas. In other words, Israel has to withdraw its forces from PA
areas and stop its incursions, assassinations and arrest campaigns in
these territories.

Third, all Palestinians in the occupied territories, that is the Gaza
Strip and the West Bank including East Jerusalem, must enjoy full right
of participation in the elections.

These requirements are not new. They are stipulations of the elections
protocol, which was one of the chapters of the Oslo II interim agreement.

The international community must also meet certain obligations to ensure
that elections take place and are free and democratic. There needs to be
extensive international monitoring with two objectives: first to ensure
that elections are free and democratic in terms of the way they are
being run and managed by the Palestinian Authority; second, to monitor
and protect the elections from possible Israeli harassment or
restrictions. Indeed, the international community needs to play an
immediate role to convince Israel to abide by the necessary requirements
to enable elections.

International economic support is also important for maintaining the
stability of the political structure of the Palestinian Authority. It is
important to maintain people's confidence in the Palestinian political
regime. The economic deterioration--the high unemployment and rising
levels of poverty--has contributed to political instability and
radicalization within Palestinian society.

Needless to say, there are also other obligations on the Palestinian
side, mainly to maintain law and order within the different Palestinian
communities, especially when and if the Israeli army evacuates such areas.

But, while many non-Palestinian observers are anxious to see the
political result of the elections, for Palestinians the important thing
is that these elections are held successfully, regardless of their
results.

