The post-Arafat shape of Palestinian politics is becoming clear. Its
features and the outcome of the struggles involved will have a huge
effect on the future of the conflict and the possibility of a negotiated
peace settlement.

The key elements are as follows.

It is a mistake to view anyone, including Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas), as
the post-Arafat leader of the Palestinians. He is already leader of the
PLO and might become head of the Palestinian Authority (PA)--"president"
in the Palestinian terminology. But that does not mean his authority
will be heeded by the PA bureaucracy, Fateh, or the security services.
The al-Aqsa Brigades and Hamas will ignore his orders unless forced to
act otherwise.

Abu Mazen certainly does not control Fateh. That organization's new head
is Faruq Qaddumi, a hardliner who is much more popular than Abu Mazen
and who reflects more faithfully the ideas of the Fateh leadership and
membership.

While the PLO and PA are largely paper organizations or at most
bureaucracies, it is Fateh where power really resides and where
decisions will actually be made. In addition, those with guns are going
to decide whether terrorism continues and whether violence will be
turned against Palestinian moderates even if they are supposedly the
movement's new leaders.

This division of power also reflects the fact that the nationalist
movement is split into three main factions, albeit very loosely
constituted and divided among themselves. Briefly and simply they can be
defined along the following lines:

The moderates. Abu Mazen is the key person in this group and the support
given him by Muhammad Dahlan, a former security official with a big
following in the Gaza Strip, is very important. Prime Minister Abu Ala
(Ahmed Qurei) can also be put into this category, though it is not clear
how well he will work with Abu Mazen.

This grouping realizes that the intifada has been largely a disaster for
the Palestinians. They want to end the violence and negotiate an
agreement with Israel in order to obtain an independent Palestinian
state. But before they can make real progress toward this goal, they
will have to take control of the movement and stop the violence.

Their problem is how to do so, especially given that the other main
groupings--the older-generation hardliners, young radicals, and
Hamas--all oppose them. They need to recruit support from the security
services and the Palestinian Legislative Council, but their success here
will be neither easy nor guaranteed.

The older-generation hardliners: Qaddumi is the most important person in
this group, but it arguably includes the great majority of Fateh
officials and activists. They adhere to what they view as Arafat's
legacy of refusing to compromise on anything less than total victory or
at least an interim settlement that would not interfere with their
ongoing efforts to destroy Israel. In this context, the demand for a
complete Palestinian "right of return" to Israel is essential.

While these people are backing Abu Mazen as the public face of the
movement, they view him as more of a figurehead and are determined to
restrain him from going too far in making a peace deal with Israel. But
they also support Abu Mazen because they hate the young radicals and
Hamas, preferring to stick together with their old comrades who are
equally devoted to Fateh's hegemony.

The young radicals. Not all younger people in Fateh support this group
but it consists of a new generation that does not respect the current
establishment. They are veterans of the first intifada and their most
important leader is Marwan Barghouti, while their organizations include
the Tanzim grassroots group and al-Aqsa Brigades.

What is especially significant about this group is that it is quite
willing to work closely with Hamas on terrorist attacks and probably on
the political level as well. If this strategy wins out in the movement,
any chance for peace would be lost, perhaps for decades, as Hamas could
veto any moderation.

If Abu Mazen wins the elections and becomes the new PA head, this will
of course strengthen his position. But how much such an event would
empower him should not be exaggerated.

The influence of Israel, or the United States and the West in general
for that matter, on Palestinian politics is also quite limited. Israel
can try to use confidence-building methods and flexibility to show that
the moderates can deliver results to the Palestinians. An attempt should
also be made to coordinate the redeployment from the Gaza Strip with the
moderate leadership. Perhaps, too, this would help Abu Mazen in the
elections.

Yet the hardliners of all factions discount Israeli concessions as
tricks while simultaneously portraying them as victories won by armed
struggle. Hence the effects of such efforts will be very much diluted.
Overwhelmingly, the future of Palestinian politics will be determined by
the Palestinians themselves.

