If, and when, the boundaries of the Palestinian state are demarcated and
implemented on the ground as part of a final phase agreement, the time
will come for the issue of Israeli settlement removal to be dealt with
at a practical level. The options for settlement evacuation are varied
but must include some, or all, of the following factors.

There must be a sufficient time lead between settling the details of the
final agreement and the eventual evacuation of those settlers who are
prepared to go peacefully, to enable them to arrange their own affairs.
The government of Israel must plan for alternative residential solutions
inside Israel, through the construction of new settlements or new
neighborhoods in existing towns, to absorb the evacuees in permanent
housing conditions.

A public agency should be established to deal with the wide range of
relocation problems, such as housing, education and employment for those
settlers who work in the West Bank and Gaza public and municipal
networks. By the same token, consultancy and psychological services must
be provided for those settlers who are traumatically affected by their
forced evacuation, especially those who perceive the evacuation as
shattering their political and religious dreams.

Adequate financial compensation should be provided for settler families
to help them get a new life in order. Unlike the Sinai experience, this
should be worked out in advance and should not be subject to a long
period of negotiation between settler leaders and government officials,
which only serves to cheapen the process in the public eye and make the
settlers out as a group of economic opportunists. No settlements should
be destroyed or razed to the ground as happened in Sinai, especially in
the Yamit region. The settlements can either be sold, or handed over, to
the Palestinian state/Authority and can serve as potential housing
solutions for some of the refugee population. Settlements which remain
in situ as a result of boundary redrawing should be encouraged to adopt
settlements which have to be evacuated--perhaps even to absorb some of
the evacuated settlers into their own communities. In this way, the
settler population would feel a limited sense of common fate with people
who originally moved to the West Bank for the same reasons and, but for
the quirk of the cartographer's pen, would have shared the same fate.

As far as possible, settler leaders and activists should be involved,
either publicly or privately, in the detailed stages of planned
evacuation, especially in cases where relocation may take place to new
settlements that will be constructed for them inside Israel. While many
of the settler leaders will refuse to undertake what they see as an act
of "collaboration," it is reasonable to assume that once the reality
sinks in, some will be prepared to become involved (even with the secret
blessing of the political leaders) so as to ensure the least possible
disruption.

As much settlement relocation as possible should occur during the summer
months when children are on vacation, so that they can be in place for
the start of the new school year, and in order that no school be
disrupted by a sudden closure or a gradual loss of students over an
extended time period.

As a means of gaining gradual acceptance amongst the settlers that they
will have to eventually relocate, a number of messages need to be
disseminated. The settlers need to be told:

  # that the longer term benefit of peace, or at least an end to
    violence and conflict, is a greater benefit to Israel as a whole
    than the continuation of settlements;

  # that the Israeli population--left and right wing alike--understands
    the political sacrifice that will be made by the settlers and will
    be prepared to assist them in the painful relocation process;

  # that in today's political and military climate, settlements are
    perceived as being a security burden rather than an asset and that
    their own lives (and those of their children) are threatened by
    remaining in these dangerous locations;

  # that many new challenges face the State of Israel in a post-conflict
    era, in the fields of education, welfare and health policies, in
    developing the country's peripheral regions, and that the settler
    population is ideally suited, due to its ideological fervor and
    commitment to the state, to meet many of these new challenges;

  # and that physical or violent opposition to evacuation will only
    serve to worsen the settlers' image amongst the wider Israeli
    population who will see them as peace spoilers and social outcasts.
    Holding out for their ideological cause could potentially do them
    long term harm in their ability to eventually reintegrate back into
    Israel. 

Nothing should be done to drive a wedge between different sectors of the
settler population. While this may work with those settlers who are
prepared to receive their compensation and relocate at an early
pre-agreement stage, this will only make the other settlers more
determined in their opposition to any such moves. At the same time, the
agreement of some to relocate may have a snowball effect, gradually
drawing in wider and wider circles of people who were previously not
prepared to leave their homes.

Public awareness of the options available should be put into operation
as soon as possible. The greater the familiarity with the practical
mechanics of settlement evacuation, the greater the chance that it can
actually take place in a relatively calm and orderly atmosphere. This
would be to the long term benefit of both the peace process and Israeli
society.

