Palestinian refugees, Jerusalem, settlements, water and borders are all
interrelated core conflict issues that have been postponed till final
status negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians. Despite the
current regression in the peace process, the two sides will--sooner or
later--come to an agreement that will embrace the two state solution,
with Jerusalem as the shared capital of those two states. In principle,
the borders of the Palestinian state will be the pre-1967 borders with
minor mutual and reciprocal border changes to allow for for geographic
integrity of the West Bank and Gaza, as well as consolidating some
settlements to Israel. Consequently, a final agreement between Israelis
and Palestinians will address the fate of the Israeli settlements in the
state of Palestine.

It is assumed that the two sides will negotiate in good faith to reach
an agreement for the withdrawal of Israeli settlers from Palestine
according to an agreed-upon timetable. Israel may decide to dismantle
and demolish the settlements and their infrastructure before its
withdrawal, but this would be an unwise and costly decision. A more
realistic approach would be to transfer the settlements and their
infrastructure to the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) in a phased
and organized manner.

Can Israel deal with the demographic pressure resulting from settlement
evacuation? During the early nineties, Israel was receiving immigrants
from the former Soviet Union in the scope of more than 300,000 per year.
The current Israeli budget for settlements in the Palestinian areas
comes close to $4 billion, which will be enough to absorb the settlers
within Israel's borders. In addition, the current security expenditures
for the settlers will no longer be necessary.

What to do with the evacuated settlements? At present, two separate and
distinctly varying infrastructures exist in the Palestinian areas: one
for the settlers and the other for Palestinians. Nevertheless,
Palestinians should benefit from the existing settlement infrastructure
and try to integrate it within the Palestinian physical planning
process. This is a challenging task since the current planning process
has worked to segregate Palestinian communities from settlements. The
PNA will utilize the settlements to alleviate some of the housing
problems for the current residents and to absorb the large number of
Palestinian returnees who will come back with the creation of the state
of Palestine. The Palestinian public should be prepared psychologically
by the leadership to accept the idea of living in the "occupier's home,"
which may be a problem for a large number of Palestinians.

The functions of each settlement, including its type (agricultural,
industrial, urban or other), shall be preserved without significant
alterations for the benefit of the emerging Palestinian state and
Palestinian society. Issues such as urban form, fabric, settlement
pattern, housing and architectural elements will all be considered in
order to harmonize those settlements with Palestinian cities and
villages. Additional architectural elements and new urban structures
will be added to the settlements, as well as to the Palestinian built-up
areas, in order to reduce the existing disparities. The physical
infrastructure of Israeli settlements, such as the roads and
transportation networks, sewage and drainage systems that are currently
connected by the Israeli physical infrastructure, will have to be
integrated and harmonized and linked to the Palestinian infrastructure
system.

Within the final status negotiations, stipulations will be made for
conducting a comprehensive inventory of houses, infrastructure,
industrial and agricultural facilities, as well as public utilities in
the settlements. A third party may need to assist in this process. In
assessing these items, consideration needs to be given to those who paid
these costs, since a good portion of the budget of Israel's so-called
"civil administration" has been diverted to settlements from Palestinian
taxpayers. Palestinians may not be willing to accept certain industrial
plants in the settlements, in which case, Israel will have to move them
at its own expense. Once an agreement is reached on the assessment of
all facilities, their official transfer to Palestinian authority will
preferably take place through a third party. The handover will require
the creation of a Palestinian ministry for absorption to receive the
settlements and their infrastructure, as well as prepare a plan for
their resettlement and operation.

One of the major tasks of this new ministry will be to allocate housing
and work with the original landowners whose land was confiscated for the
construction of the settlements. In principle, landowners should be
given priority (under well-defined guidelines) for reacquiring their
confiscated lands, as well as living in the evacuated houses, or
compensated fully if they choose not to. For the rest of the
settlements, well-defined criteria for occupying the evacuated
settlements will have to be developed.

