The Palestinian-Israeli conflict is influenced a great deal by foreign
aid contributions for the simple reason that the two parties are heavily
dependent on these contributions in all respects. Israel, which is
relatively less dependent on foreign aid, receives direct and indirect
economic support from the United States and European Union, in addition,
of course, to material support in the form of military assistance.

One can speak of two reasons Israel receives this monetary backing:
first is the commitment that Europe has made to the survival of Israel
as a form of compensation/support after the suffering of the Jewish
people in Europe during World War II, but second and more important is
the political self-interest that drives both American and European
support. Israel plays a political and strategic role in the region that
the United States and European countries believe advances their
interests. Thus, most of the foreign aid that Israel receives is based
on a mutual understanding over common interests, which enhances the
durability and long life of that aid.

Palestinians, as the weaker party, are more dependent on foreign aid.
Their assistance comes in part from Arab oil-producing countries, Saudi
Arabia in particular, but also from the European Union and the United
States. It comes at times in the form of government support for the
Palestinian Authority, and at other times is extended through
international development agencies to the Palestinian Authority or to
Palestinian civil society organizations.

An analysis of the foreign aid that comes to Palestinians is more
complicated because it is more varied. This aid is not based on
perceived mutual interests, but rather on humanitarian grounds or as an
attempt to influence the politics of the Palestinian people, whether
internally (by trying to direct the public debate in a certain
direction) or by bluntly trying to bend the political positions taken by
the Palestinian people and their leadership. This stands true for
foreign aid coming from Arab and non-Arab donors alike.

This characteristic, as well as Palestinian aid's diverse disbursement,
makes it less sustainable, more occasional and consequently less
valuable and less influential. One can think of two periods that clearly
illustrate the role of foreign aid in the conflict. When the Palestinian
resistance was at its height in the 1970s and early 80s, Arab
oil-producing countries wished to neutralize the growing political
weight of Palestinians in pan-Arab politics, for example, and
manipulated their monetary support accordingly. Later, from 1996 to
2000, the international donor community dangled foreign aid as a carrot
and stick before the Palestinian Authority to influence its negotiating
positions.

After the signing of the Oslo accords, attempts to tie foreign aid to
improving the relations between Palestinians and Israelis (dubbed
"people-to-people" programs) proved to be artificial. Foreign aid to
Palestinians has played a crucial role in humanitarian support and
development. However, the best outcomes for this aid have been
restricted by the ongoing political conflict and the constraints placed
on the Palestinian economy by the Israeli occupation and reoccupation.
The naive aims of politically motivated support also devalued the
foreign aid effort as a whole.

In the final analysis, attempts to use foreign aid as a means of
consolidating the peace process have not been successful by any measure.
The reason, of course, is not that making peace doesn't require foreign
aid, but that without accompanying political effort, foreign aid cannot
compensate for defects and deficiencies in the structure of the
political process between Palestinians and Israelis.

