Zeev Hever has served in recent years as head of the "Amana" movement,
the settlement arm of the Yesha Council (Council of the Communities in
Judea, Samaria and Gaza). Hever, nicknamed Zambish, is a close personal
friend of the prime minister of Israel. What do these two have in
common, with their quarter-century age differential? Simply this: Ariel
Sharon, despite his frequent involvement in financial improprieties, in
his heart of hearts likes and respects idealists who keep their distance
from financial issues and devote themselves entirely to the Jewish
people and to Zionist ideals. In his eyes Zambish symbolizes these ideals.

On December 16, two days before Sharon's Herzliya speech
                                               , Hever addressed the
press for the first time in years. It happened at Migron, the outpost
Sharon intends to dismantle. Hever, who is a kind of alter ego to Sharon
when it comes to Zionist ideals, declared that dismantling settlements
is a type of mental illness; a throwback to the Jews' spiritual ills
from Diaspora days, when they were submissive and sought only to grovel
to the lord of the land in 18th and 19th century Eastern Europe. There
could be no greater insult to the likes of Ariel Sharon, a
symbol--certainly in his own eyes--of the "new Jew", born on the land,
free of the complexes of ghetto Jews, who knows how to say a sharp "no"
to the rulers of the world, i.e., to American presidents.

If Hever hoped to influence the contents of the Herzliya speech, he
failed. Sharon stated that he had made a commitment to President Bush to
"dismantle unauthorized outposts. It is my intention to implement this
commitment . . . Period." Nor did he hesitate to commit to "changing the
deployment" of veteran settlements, not recently built outposts, as part
of a "redeployment" and unilateral disengagement. Member of Knesset Uri
Ariel, another old friend of Sharon, stated after the speech that the
very soldiers once dispatched by Sharon to fight at the front for the
Zionist ideal had now been shot by him in the back. And what is the
Zionist ideal if not settlement? This is a heavily loaded statement in
an Israel that has not yet recovered from the trauma of the Rabin
assassination. Prior to his election to the Knesset, Ariel was the
general secretary of the Yesha Council. The troika of Sharon-Ariel-Hever
had worked closely together on planning and implementing Jewish
settlement throughout Judea and Samaria.

Intelligence services near and far, and the political establishments in
Israel, the Arab states and the West are all busily trying to answer the
question: is this a new Sharon? Does he really mean to implement what he
presented in Herzliya? And if so, what are his motives? What caused such
an extreme metamorphosis in the earlier convictions of this much-admired
man? Most of all, though, it is the settlers--the people for whom Sharon
really was the man who enabled the fulfillment of their Zionist
ideals--who are agonizing over these questions. Many of them desperately
want to believe that this is but one more "ploy" of the sort Sharon
executed over the course of long years when he held central positions in
the life of the country, in the army and beyond.

My advice to my settler friends is to stop agonizing. If Zambish and Uri
Ariel, perhaps the closest people to Sharon other than his family and
immediate assistants, said what they said about Sharon, then something
has gone seriously wrong. Between loyalty to his ideals and to them on
the one hand, and keeping his promise to President Bush on the other,
Sharon chose Bush. Anyone who believes that unilateral redeployment will
increase terrorism--since the Palestinians will now believe that they
have broken the will even of Ariel Sharon--rather than reduce it; anyone
who believes that a State of Israel reduced to a crowded ghetto within
an area of 20,000 square kilometers is living on borrowed time; anyone
who thinks that the destruction of settlements is a mortal blow--from a
moral, ideological and human standpoint--to the very soul of Zionism,
must take his/her place at the forefront of the non-violent struggle to
thwart Ariel Sharon's plans.

This week, for eight days, the Jewish people celebrate Hanukkah,
commemorating the Jewish victory over the Greeks. More than 2,100 years
ago the Jews revolted against the Greeks who had conquered their land. A
considerable portion of the Jews opposed the revolt, preferring to
collaborate with the Greeks--people of culture, rulers of the world in
their day. They were called "Hellenizers". In the end the victors were
those known as "zealots"--today known as "settlers". What is certain is
that the Hellenizers, who had tired of the struggle against the Greeks
and were enchanted by Greek culture, slowly abandoned their people and
their country, just like the old elites of today who seek to integrate
with globalization, particularly of the American variety. In contrast,
the sons and daughters of the zealots sustained the generational chain
of Judaism, and it is thanks to them that there exists today a Jewish
people who returned, after some 1,900 years of exile, to reestablish a
state in their land.

