Q: How has foreign aid influenced the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict, particularly in recent years?

A: Donors have said very specifically for a decade now that
foreign aid is designed to underpin a peace process. They say very
bluntly and openly that aid to the Palestinian Authority is seen as
peace implementation or peace facilitation. Whether or not it has played
that role is another question.

I think that foreign aid has played an important role to some extent in
reducing the distortion in the occupied Palestinian territories that
existed particularly in the period prior to the last ten years.
Palestinian incomes were rising while their public services,
infrastructure and public spaces were degrading for close to 30 years
[after Israel's 1967 occupation].

For the last decade, though, personal incomes /have/ been on the decline
due to Israeli measures blocking Palestinian access to the Israeli labor
and commodity markets. The aid has to some extent served to mitigate the
distortion of this occupied economy. In the last three years, much of
the aid has been budgetary support for the Palestinian Authority to
allow it to be able to meet salary payments.

Q: How then has the aid influenced the course of the conflict?

A: Some donor countries have said openly, and others have said
not so openly, that for the last two years at least, they have been
financing the fallout of Israel's measures rather than allowing Israel
to bear the full weight of its actions and pay for the damage and
destruction that it has caused. Seen from that donor perspective, some
might say that they have fueled the conflict--if the aid had stopped,
then the Israelis would bear a much bigger burden and not engage in the
behavior that they have.

Q: Is the international community considering pulling back
for this reason?

A: I think that the donors are engaged in that rethinking. It is
a good question.

Q: Both Israel and the Palestinian Authority draw a large
portion of their budget from foreign aid. How might each, in a perfect
world, make the transition to a self-sufficient economy?

A: Were it not for the movement restrictions and the difficulties
imposed on the Palestinian population as a result of Israeli measures,
there would be no need for budgetary support. In 1999, [the Palestinian
Authority] had a balanced operating budget. The Palestinian Authority,
relative to what it has received, however, would have only minimally
been able to cover the development budget that creates medical
facilities, public infrastructure, public space, technical assistance, etc.

Let's keep in mind that we are talking about a population that has a
large component of refugees and that has been under occupation since
1967. The degradation of public infrastructure has been great and
ongoing for nearly four decades.

Israel, on the other hand, is the largest recipient of external funding
in the world, bar none. On a per capita basis, that equals three times
what the Palestinians receive, and somewhere over $1,000 per person per
year. Could the Israelis do without that? Most of this assistance is
official and comes from the United States. Roughly half of that is
military assistance. If Israel wants to maintain the fourth largest army
in the world at the current level of readiness, then it will probably
have to continue to receive that amount.

Q: Given the experience of the Oslo accords where donors
gave a large amount of money and then the process collapsed, if there
were to be a comprehensive settlement would there also be a willingness
to give?

A: My sense is that if there were to be a comprehensive
settlement bringing real peace and justice, the donors would give more.
In the past three years, most of the assistance has come from Arab
countries for budget support [of the Palestinian Authority]. In that
case, the Arab states would play a greater role if a comprehensive
solution were to be found. The other main donors of the
Palestinians--the European Union, Japan, and the United States--would
probably also be forthcoming.

