Q: Can humanitarian aid bring peace or maintain the peace
process?

A: Aid alone cannot maintain the process. But it can and does
grease the wheels of peace.

Q: Some in Israel and the international community argue
that the provision of international humanitarian aid to the Palestinian
population actually prolongs the conflict.

A: Aid does not prolong this conflict. It is the right thing to
do. International aid began with the occupation back in the 1960s, and
it was justified then as now. The aid organizations did good work in the
field. They recruited local resources in the areas of education and
development and played an important role in the well being of the
population.

Q: How does Israel's Civil Administration fit into this
scheme?

A: It assists the dozens of international organizations, the
United Nations, Red Cross and many [non-governmental organizations] that
are present in the field. The Civil Administration is very familiar with
these groups. This stems from the fact that the state of Israel cannot
fill the organizations' function. Since the aid is necessary, it is best
filled by the international groups and not, say, Hamas. Better to create
a real humanitarian infrastructure and not that of Hamas' terrorist
summer camps. The Civil Administration has trained its own
"international organization officers." The Israel Defense Forces [IDF]
has now integrated humanitarian aid into its combat doctrine.

Q: Yet the international organizations complain of friction
with the IDF.

A: It is not always simple to balance combat with humanitarian
aid. There are issues of time and space: first the battle has to end.
Moreover, over the years fears and suspicions develop. [We have learned
that] not every ambulance and aid shipment is "clean"; so suspicions
arise. With good communications we can solve these problems. This
insight has now penetrated deep into the IDF combat echelon; the soldier
at the roadblock better understands the need for aid.

Q: Yet over the past year or so, the aid organizations have
talked about pulling out.

A: They won't depart. There was a disguised threat to leave, but
largely to pressure Israel to let them get the job done. If they were to
pull out, this would not end the conflict; on the contrary, the
resultant poverty would worsen the situation. The vacuum would not be
filled entirely by Israel but by Hamas.

Q: Why? Why can't Israel provide the aid if need be? Or the
Palestinian Authority?

A: You can't turn back the clock to status quo ante. If the aid
ends [even under conditions of peace], the Palestinian Authority is
still not capable of filling the gap. But [neither can we, because the
Palestinian Authority] aspires to independence and has learned not to
work with us. In any case Israel never provided 100 percent.

Q: There are allegations that Palestinian inefficiency and
corruption complicate the aid picture.

A: Inefficiency contributes to lack of development. This touches
not on the question whether there's enough food, but rather on
infrastructure development, for example the Palestinian water economy.
Of course, the conflict makes things worse, but (even without it)
Palestinian government offices are not organized as they should be.
[Minister of Finance Salam] Fayyad has still not succeeded in breaking
the monopolies on energy supply, cement and agricultural exports.

The aid organizations come to us with these complaints, but there is
little we can do. We try to provide security, mobility, and the
necessary statutory permits--areas where the Palestinians are weak.

Q: Does the international aid improve or hinder Israel's
relations with the aid-giving countries and organizations?

A: Improve, unequivocally. In the eyes of the aid-givers as well,
the joint projects and working relationships contribute to relations.

Q: Israel and the Palestinian Authority developed a complex
economic relationship after 1993. In retrospect, was this beneficial?

A: The present situation of intifada is not natural and does not
bear faithful testimony to the relationship. In view of the huge
disparity between the economies, the Oslo and Paris agreements were the
right ones in their day. The Palestinian economy was supposed to grow,
to stand on its own two feet. They were to have their own air and sea
ports and economic independence. The process can still be renewed with
joint industrial zones and the return of Palestinian labor to Israel.

The trade balance at its peak was about $2.6 billion per annum in
Palestinian imports from Israel and $800 million in Palestinian exports
to Israel. This was Israel's biggest trading relationship after the
United States. This has declined radically since the intifada began.

