International aid is not new to the Palestinians. Nor is Israel's
problematic attitude toward that aid.

Back in the pre-1967 days, when Israelis contemplated the role of UNRWA
(United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the
Near East) in the Palestinian refugee camps across the green line in
Gaza and the West Bank, the impression was overwhelmingly negative.
UNRWA, it was argued, contributed to Palestinian incitement and violence
against Israel, and by its very existence prolonged the existence of the
refugee issue, hence extended the conflict. But after the Six-Day War
and the beginning of an Israeli occupation that in some forms and areas
continues to this day, Israeli attitudes quickly changed. UNRWA, it was
discovered, also fed, clothed and educated Palestinians--functions that
would have to be born by the Israeli occupier unless it cooperated with
the UN organization.

Since then international aid to the Palestinians has only increased.
Over the course of the decade that has elapsed since the Oslo process
began, the Palestinians have received international development
assistance at one of the highest per capita rates in the world. Close to
seven billion aid dollars have been committed. And half of this has been
provided during the past three and a half years alone, since the current
conflict commenced.

Today most of this aid takes the form of emergency humanitarian
assistance. According to the World Bank, the ratio between development
aid and emergency aid changed from 7:1 before the intifada to 1:5 in
2002. This means that the international community is now essentially
devoting its support--about one billion dollars in 2002--to keeping this
generation of Palestinians alive rather than to developing Palestine for
future generations and sustaining the peace process.

If the international community were to withdraw its aid tomorrow, the
world would look to Israel--still technically the occupying power--to
provide sustenance for Palestinians. Israel would still be obliged to
export foodstuffs to Palestine and provide for the Palestinian
electricity, water, fuel and communications infrastructures, but neither
the aid-givers nor the Palestinian Authority would be able to pay for
them. As a result, Israel would be out of pocket by as much as $2
billion annually--unless it chose to allow Palestinians to starve while
the world watched.

This would not stop the fighting. Without the international aid, the
Palestinian economic situation would get worse, not better. Palestinians
would not stop attacking Israelis, and Israel would not stop retaliating
for the violence. If anything, the occupation--and the opposition it
provokes--would become more intense. Once again the many Israeli
security people and politicians who today consider the international aid
community to be a hypercritical source of trouble for Israel, would
quickly change their minds.

Now Israel's disengagement plans provide the aid community with a new
and unique opportunity. If Israel does indeed abandon settlements in the
Gaza Strip and perhaps in the West Bank, the aid givers have a unique
opportunity to petition Israel to turn the homes, farms and
infrastructure that it abandons over to them, e.g., to the United
Nations and/or the World Bank. In cooperation with the Palestinian
Authority, these international institutions can then redistribute these
assets to Palestinians in an equitable manner. They can also ensure that
Israel receives a "credit" of major proportions, looking to the day
when, under a peace agreement, the value of these assets will be
deducted from Israeli compensation payments to Palestinian 1948 refugees.

The international aid community should begin by appealing, now,
publicly, to the government of Israel, to ensure that those assets are
not destroyed or removed if and when the settlers leave--to guarantee
that Prime Minister Ariel Sharon does not yield to the same impulse that
led him to destroy the settlements in Sinai when Israel departed in
1982.

