Q: What was your impression of Israeli Prime Minister
Ariel Sharon's "disengagement plan"
                                               ?

A: Sharon was giving the Palestinians an ultimatum: "either you
accept my roadmap                                                  with
the 14 alterations injected by my government (and this is the maximum
that you will get out of me) or we are going to unilaterally give you
less than that. The choice is yours--if you opt for negotiations, I can
give you more, but you should know (and this is a tacit understanding)
that the most you will get even then is the most that is offered in 'my
roadmap', which includes only the land inside the wall."

Q: Why this proposal now?

A: First, I don't think that Sharon is changing his ideology,
but practically, there are many things that he wants to take into
account. He wants to please the American administration, but he also
wants to use this time during which the American administration is
entering an election campaign to push for his own interests. He also
wants to send a message to Israeli society because he was criticized
internally for having no plan. Third, he wants to kill the Geneva accord.

I think that Sharon has reached the conclusion--and this might be the
one item that he has changed his mind about--that after wanting all of
"Eretz Israel" to become a Jewish state and advocating for a long time
for the expulsion of Palestinians, their physical transfer is
impossible. Now, instead of a practical transfer, he wants to implement
the "legal transfer" of Palestinians. Legal transfer means that while we
will live inside "Eretz Israel", we will not be part of the state of
Israel, meaning we will not reach a situation of apartheid and
Palestinians will no longer be able to opt for one state.

Basically, he has in mind that part of the West Bank will be
incorporated into the state of Israel. The wall is the marker; it is not
a security barrier, but the border. Put the Palestinians in cantons and
let them call that a state, but that state will not be sovereign, will
not be independent. If Palestinians accept this through negotiations,
then Sharon is ready to give it to them. If they do not, then he is
going to remove the Israeli military presence from small areas and sit
tight until Palestinians agree to return to his plan, which he will
disguise under the roadmap. The second stage of the roadmap calls for a
temporary state; this is the temporary state made permanent.

Q: Why did the meeting between prime ministers Sharon
and Ahmed Qurei' never happen?

A: From a Palestinian perspective, why should it happen? I don't
understand why the Palestinian prime minister would go and meet with
Sharon, especially after his speech. The Palestinian reaction to the
speech was that we reject unilateral actions. A meeting with Sharon now
means that we accept negotiations instead. The question is, on what
basis? On his roadmap and the 14 qualifications? The greatest thing that
Sharon gained from this ultimatum is that his roadmap will become
legitimate and will become the maximum Palestinians can achieve.

Q: In this situation, what can the Palestinian
Authority do?

A: I think that the best way to face Sharon's ultimatum is not
to meet with him, but to offer him and Israel a Palestinian ultimatum in
return. The Palestinian ultimatum would be:

"We know that you want to squeeze us into cantons and thereby cheat us
and the world of the two-state solution. We agree to a two-state
solution--we have indicated this for a long time--but that two-state
solution must be based on the 1967 borders, give and take minor
exchanges. As such, we are giving you a few months (maybe six months)
and as a measure of trust, we will offer you a Palestinian truce [during
that time]. If, however, the wall continues to be built and the
settlement expansion policy continues in these six months, then we will
understand that you are closing the gates to a two-state solution.

"If so, then we will accommodate you. In that case, we are going to
close the two-state option forever, and from then on, we will pursue the
establishment of just one state. Further, from then on, you will have to
bear the consequences of your occupation. We will dissolve the
Palestinian Authority and you won't have the Authority there to cripple
with your actions, even as you blame it morning and night. Then you will
have to deal with the Palestinian people, meeting us on equal terms 20
or 30 years from now when there is one vote for every person.

"The meaning of all of this is that if you are afraid of the political
effects of demography, then we are going to use it against you. Beware."

Q: What are the dangers of this approach?

A: Any plan should have its alternative built in, and this
requires more discussion among Palestinians. We should tell Sharon that
if he doesn't accept the two-state solution [in order] to separate from
us, then we will give him more of us. To give Israel more of us means
that we have to dissolve the Palestinian Authority.

In order for the Palestinians to get a fully sovereign, independent
state on the 1967 borders, Palestinians should use the only thing that
Israel and Israelis are afraid of, i.e. the political effects of the
demographic factor. Thus, the one-state solution is the medium for
gaining the two-state solution. Now the question is, will the Authority
dissolve itself? That is the question that remains to be answered.

