The immediate and laudatory purpose of a United States military campaign
against Iraq is to stamp out the regime of Saddam Hussein, the world's
most psychopathic ruler, and to strike a blow against terrorism and the
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. As such this is a welcome
move from Israel's standpoint, whatever the consequences.

But there will be consequences, some of which are liable to have a
profound effect, for better or for worse, on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. Indeed, at least some of the neo-conservative planners in the
Pentagon and the National Security Council fully intend that the war in
Iraq project far-reaching consequences upon the region. They believe
that the removal by force of Saddam's regime, the "democratization" of
Iraq and the implantation of an American occupying presence--military,
political, proxy or other--in the heart of one of the political and
civilizational centers of the Arab Middle East will have a moderating
and democratizing effect on the entire region, and as such will be good
for Israeli-Palestinian peace.

At times, listening to descriptions of what these planners intend, I am
reminded of the dramatic opening scene in Stanley Kubrick's classic
film, "2001: A Space Odyssey," in which apes in a desert land confront a
black monolith implanted from space by a superior civilization. The
monolith renders the apes into ape-men; they begin to turn bones into
tools; and so civilization on earth begins.

Somewhat similarly (though without any intention whatsoever on the part
of this writer to compare people to apes), the American planners--who
display considerable disdain for most of the Muslim and Arab
worlds--seem to think that the forcible removal of Saddam's evil regime
and the consequent implantation of an American military presence in the
wild Middle East will project a civilizing or liberating influence. They
are not alone; not a few progressive Arab thinkers (and many Israelis)
appear to welcome this American deus ex machina into the region.

How the US is going to conquer Iraq is fairly clear, and appears to be
definitely feasible. How it is going to hold post-war Iraq together and
democratize it is less clear. Even the Pentagon planners do not yet
appear to have a convincing plan. Nor do the projected ripple effects on
the region reflect even a plan, but rather an assumption: that the
events in Iraq will simply frighten neighboring violent, corrupt,
terrorist and non-democratic regimes, including the Palestinian
Authority, into reforming themselves, and/or will encourage and inspire
powerful democratic elements in these countries to take matters into
their own hands.

Again, these would be welcome developments from Israel's standpoint. But
a thousand and one different things could and undoubtedly will go wrong
with these scenarios. Here we shall mention just two.

First, in the Israeli elections, barring unforeseen developments, Ariel
Sharon will be returned to power. Indeed, by election time on January 28
the prospect of war in Iraq will be so palpable that the Israeli
electorate's knee-jerk reaction will probably be that this is not the
time to "change horses," but rather to maintain in power a feisty
general who has a steady hand on the wheel and is a good friend of
President Bush. The status of the American leader will also be
strengthened by the war. But Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat will
probably still be around. It is hard to imagine fellow Palestinians or
moderate Arab leaders physically removing him from Ramallah and leading
him into exile, but even if this does happen, his replacement could
easily be either persons more extreme, or simply chaos.

None of these three leaders has thus far displayed a realistic strategy
for Israeli-Palestinian peace. War in Iraq will change neither their
world views nor their constituencies. On the contrary, it may strengthen
the hardliners among those constituencies.

Secondly if, as many fear, Iraq responds to the American military
campaign by attacking Israel with non-conventional weapons, and if it
succeeds in causing significant casualties, then Sharon (or for that
matter any other conceivable Israeli prime minister) is liable to
respond in a way that seems just and necessary from an Israeli strategic
and Jewish historical standpoint but that poisons Israeli-Arab relations
for a long time to come. This is not a likely scenario, but it is
possible. We had better pray that Israel's improved anti-missile and
other defenses, coupled with American efforts, render our concerns
superfluous.

This brings us full circle back to the "Space Odyssey" scenario. As
Kubrick fans will recall, the first thing the gift of "civilization"
teaches the newly enlightened man-apes is. . . how to use their tools to
kill one another.

