Q: When the Palestinian leadership looks past the Israeli
elections and the war on Iraq, what does it see ahead?

A: We would like to see a road to peace. What seems to be the major
obstacle now to stopping the confrontations and ending the occupation is
the specter of the war on Iraq and the elections in Israel on January
28. With these two on, the Americans have retreated from the position of
putting the road plan in force, and with these two on, there seems to be
little likelihood that there will be a major advance for peace.

After that, we are really hoping that things will change and that the
dynamics in Israel will be such as to push for peace; the dynamics in
Palestinian society doing the same; and the international community
applying more pressure to get the peace process moving. At least this is
our hope.

Q: When members of the Palestinian Authority get together
and think strategically about how best to pursue those goals, what are
the key things you work on?

A: We are working on things that we can control now. We are working
on the constitution; we are working on Palestinian reform; we are
pursuing a dialogue with Hamas to stop all violence between [Palestinian
factions] and stop all violence against civilians; we are engaged in a
process of persuading the rest of the Arab world and international
community to keep the hope alive and to push the American-sponsored
roadmap.

We are also engaged in at least some form of dialogue with at last some
Israelis. This is tricky because the more we engage in that dialogue,
the more it can create some negative effects among those in Israel who
would use this against these peace supporters. So, as much as we would
obviously like to see winning the elections the coalition that supports
peace and end to occupation, we have a limitation to how much we can
advocate this without embarrassing the Israeli parties.

Q: Can you say who those parties are?

A: Well, they are obviously parties within the pro-peace camp in
the Labor party and in Meretz.

Q: What do you think right now is the Palestinian
Authority's biggest worry for the coming months?

A: We are worried very much about the Israeli extreme right, which
is now quite powerful within the present Israeli government, [and may]
try to use the war on Iraq as a pretext for escalation against the
Palestinian people, such as a full occupation of Gaza, an attempt to
transfer Palestinians out of Jerusalem, or out of Palestine altogether.
We are afraid that the Israeli government and the Israeli extreme right
will try to push aside the minimum constraints in the Geneva Convention
by claiming that the Palestinians are just part of Al Qaeda, they are
doing what Osama bin Ladin did in New York, just painting us with the
Taliban picture and discounting any [Israeli] commitments as an occupier
to the Geneva convention.

Q: How close do you think that we are to this scenario?

A: We are not far. The present government includes many people who
support this ideologically and are not hiding their orientation. Within
the Israeli security agencies and the army, there are those who are
trying to operationally translate ideologies into specific action.

However, I have received assurances everywhere I went that this is not
going to be tolerated. Mainly from Mr. Powell himself, very clearly and
very adamantly, and also from Joschka Fisher, Jack Straw, President
Chirac and others. The world cannot possibly look aside if this happens.
Therefore, even though there is great risk, I am not really an alarmist.

Q: If Ariel Sharon does win the Israeli elections, do you
think that negotiations are possible with his government?

A: From our point of view, we are ready. We have been ready; we
have never taken the position that we decide who is the Israeli partner.
But if the question is posed differently--do you think that the Israeli
party led by Sharon is really ready to go to elections and willing to
make these elections lead to real peace?--I say that I am really
skeptical that that is going to happen, especially with what looks like
the "new line" of the Likud party and the kind of partners Likud will have.

Not unless there is a real commitment by the Americans will anything
push that kind of government to go back to real negotiations leading to
peace. It is not impossible, but highly improbably.

Q: What is your message to the Israeli people, then, on
the eve of elections?

A: We Israelis and Palestinians both need to position ourselves as
clearly and as early as possible to regain the peace process and regain
the process of negotiations, guided this time by clear objectives and
less manipulative ways of delaying forever the inevitable.

Second, I think that we should both act as clearly as possible against
escalation, particularly against civilians--be they Palestinian or
Israeli civilians--in order to reduce the wounds between our two people.
This is a goal that needs to be pushed and supported by the Israeli
people, as much as the Palestinian people.

Peace--it is inevitable that we will get back to it. So let us keep our
contacts, our relations, our hopes and our visions directed to the life
after this confrontation and not be consumed by the confrontation. Let
us move into action that will put both our efforts in the right
direction.

