As an anti-terrorist, anti-infiltration barrier, the fence is a good
idea. Sunday's bus-bombing in Jerusalem demonstrated once again why we
need a fence. But why is it so hard for us to get it right?

The fence should have been built more or less on the green line. Had
this been the case, the issue would never have gotten to the
International Court of Justice at The Hague. Now, when it is too late,
we seem to be arriving at this conclusion, but in the clumsiest of ways.

It is important that we are moving sections of the fence back to the
green line, and announcing that certain planned enclaves will not be
fenced in. But by doing this in perfect timing with the opening of the
court's proceedings, we appear to be affirming that we recognize the
justice of the Palestinian/UN case and the legal and humanitarian
argument against the fence in its original, intrusive path; and that we
fear the court's authority, with key planners of the fence seemingly
afraid of being charged with war crimes.

Still, there is in these moves at least an element of damage
control--which cannot be said about the extremely visible eight meter
high wall that is being built in the Abu Dis neighborhood in Jerusalem.
It is as if we consciously sought to provide the world with a photogenic
section of the barrier in the world's most controversial city to focus
on during The Hague deliberations.

Nor are we dealing intelligently with the court's proceedings. We
submitted a deposition to explain why the court does not, or should not,
have jurisdiction over this issue--and I agree with the position of
Israel and most of the world's leading democracies that it should not.
Then why boycott the court hearings by arguing that the judges will read
our deposition anyway and we have nothing to add? Since when can anyone
be certain that 15 judges will indeed read and fully absorb a
deposition? And who will point out to the judges the distortions in the
Palestinian presentation?

We have allowed the court hearings to become a major media and
information arena for the Israeli-Palestinian dispute. But instead of
the government of Israel being represented at the court, it is financing
and briefing a variety of non-governmental bodies who will argue its
case in the streets of The Hague. We are asking the Jewish Agency,
student groups, organizations of victims of terrorism, and Dutch
evangelical Christians to argue the case instead of us. Their presence
and contribution are important and welcome. But why have we gone
underground on this issue and ceased to behave like a sovereign state?
It is the State of Israel that should be pointing out again and again,
in the court and to the media, that in every statement made by
Palestinian spokespersons they conveniently ignore the fact that their
suicide bombers brought about this fence--that they bear legal and moral
responsibility for what has happened.

There are weighty claims to be judged here: the validity of Israel's
ongoing occupation of the West Bank and Gaza; its right to defend itself
against suicide bombers; the legality of the settlements (some of which
are protected by the fence); Israel's right to requisition land for the
fence; the validity of security constraints on Palestinian freedom of
movement; the need for the dispute to be resolved at the negotiating
table and not in court.

It could have been different had Prime Minister Ariel Sharon allowed the
fence to fulfill its original anti-terrorist purpose and not hijacked it
for his own objective of territorial gain. Now he's trying to do the
same thing by hijacking another good idea, unilateral redeployment and
dismantling of settlements, with the ultimate goal of annexing parts of
the West Bank.

At this rate we're liable to end up back in court at The Hague on a
second count.

