It seems that the repeated rebuffs Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
is getting from members of his Likud Party will affect his political
course. The lack of support for his Gaza withdrawal plan will ultimately
weaken his ability to move ahead with it, especially after he has
realized that his opponents are more numerous than expected.

Sharon's overtures to the Labor Party were a key factor in the success
or otherwise of the withdrawal plan, and the Likud vote against Labor
joining the government will have a huge impact on Sharon's agenda in
this regard.

While Sharon is set to try to carry on regardless--believing that, as
polls indicate, the Israeli public supports a pullout from Gaza, and
that his standing in the international arena will also improve, having
convinced the United States in particular he can indeed carry through
such a withdrawal--it is hard to see that this time he can ignore the
most important institutions of his party.

Sharon's opponents, the so-called Likud "rebels," realize that if Sharon
succeeds in bringing Labor into the government he would automatically
get the support of the majority of members of the government and the
Knesset without having to convince or appease his opponents in the
Likud. In other words, the party would lose its ability to affect the
decision-making process of the government. Hence their opposition to a
coalition government was strong and blunt, arguing that Labor would push
for the establishment of a Palestinian state within the 1967 borders and
restore President Yasser Arafat's political activity, something
unacceptable to the Likud rank-and-file.

Thus Sharon is in a bind. If he disregards the result of the Likud vote
and continues his efforts to bring Labor into the government and
actually succeeds in overriding the opposition in the Likud, he would
find himself severed from his own party in every sense with consequent
grave risks to his political future.

On the other hand, if Sharon heeds his party's decision, he would be
unable to carry out his unilateral withdrawal, even with a majority vote
in the government and Knesset, because ultimately he would have to go
back to the Likud to approve the evacuation of Gaza Strip settlements,
which is highly unlikely.

And a coalition formed without Labor, based for example on the Likud,
Shinui, fundamentalist parties and others, would be equally problematic
given the influence of the settler movement in some of those parties.
That is, if such a coalition could get off the ground given Shinui's
opposition to joining a coalition without Labor.

On the Palestinian side, some factions, in particular Hamas, will be
happy with the Likud vote, which, in addition to their general
opposition to Sharon's unilateral plan, they also believe supports their
view that the current Israeli government is not interested in peace.

Hamas has long declared its opposition to Sharon's plan, which it
considers political deception, and has tried to convince the Egyptians
and the Palestinian Authority not to work with it. Having failed in this
effort, Hamas made do with offering its views on the subject, on the
future of the Strip and on its own possible political participation in
administering the Strip. But on this latter issue, and on the armed
resistance, Hamas suspended any final decision until the movement saw
the extent of the Israeli withdrawal.

This was despite Egypt's efforts to persuade Hamas not to stand in the
way of any possible withdrawal. Egypt, now, also finds itself in a jam.
The Likud vote has made Egyptian efforts to convince skeptical
Palestinian factions of any advantage accruing from a unilateral Israeli
withdrawal even more problematic. For as long as Sharon cannot give them
a clear position, they have nothing to argue with.

In short, the political reality is such that Sharon will not be able to
move ahead with his withdrawal plan, something that will suit Hamas,
increase their popularity, and convince the majority of Palestinians
that Israel is not really interested in evacuating settlements and
occupied territory. In turn this may affect the Palestinian Authority,
which with little else in the cards may be forced into accepting a
national government comprising all the factions.

