Last week's Likud Central Committee decision to reject the Labor Party
as a disengagement coalition partner is in fact a rejection of Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon's disengagement policy. It both reflects and
reinforces a number of important political dynamics in Israel.

First and foremost, Sharon's debacle highlights the contradictions
implicit in his own policy zigzags, contradictions he is apparently
incapable of overcoming. The general who talks peace doesn't have a
peace plan. The man who built the settlements now ostensibly wants to
dismantle them. And the leader who wants to disengage unilaterally from
Palestinian territories is seemingly incapable of articulating
persuasive reasons for doing so. Those many Israelis who understand why
we must disengage don't mind; but those--particularly in Sharon's own
party--who need to be persuaded, hear no coherent explanations from
their leader regarding demography, democracy and international realities.

Sharon deserves credit for leading the country in recent years through
trying times and finding military solutions for a large portion of
Palestinian terrorism. But he has consistently misplayed his political
hand. He could have kept his previous unity government with Labor if he
had implemented the settlement restriction policies he now agrees to
follow. He could have had another unity government with Labor 18 months
ago if only he had accepted Amram Mitzna's demand to dismantle the
single settlement of Netzarim in the Gaza Strip. He first opposed the
fence, then built it as a crass land grab, and now faces (according to
Attorney General Menachem Mazuz) a genuine threat of international
sanctions unless he rebuilds the fence along the route he should have
chosen to begin with.

Perhaps strangest of all for a politician of such legendary skills, he
has badly misplayed his hand within his own party. The man who created
the Likud back in the 1970s is now perceived as flouting its
institutions and policy pronouncements. Two years ago the party central
committee rejected Sharon's two state policy; in May 2004 it voted
against disengagement in a referendum Sharon himself initiated; and now
in August the central committee has put all 40 Likud members of Knesset
on notice that if they cooperate with Sharon's plans to bring Labor into
the government and proceed with disengagement, their political future is
in doubt. Under Sharon, the Likud has seemingly become a party dominated
by thugs and the basest kind of influence peddlers: ask former Likud
leaders Moshe Arens and Dan Meridor, who left in disgust.

Another set of political dynamics is at work at the broader strategic
level. Sharon's setback last week reminds us that for three decades the
Palestinian issue has been the single most powerful source of
governmental instability in Israel. As a corollary the threat of schism
within the Likud--implicit in Sharon's resolve to proceed with forming a
disengagement coalition--also follows a pattern that began in the 1980s,
with right wing leaders Shamir and Netanyahu seeking however timidly to
adjust to regional and strategic realities and being repeatedly thwarted
by their own most extreme supporters. Shamir lost the election of 1992
to Yitzhak Rabin because of the split in right wing votes.

Palestinian leader Yasser Arafat is also under attack from dissidents
within his own political movement, and here too the root cause is the
conflict and its effects on society. But that hardly makes Arafat and
Sharon two of a kind: the only characteristic that unites them (along
with United States President George W. Bush) is that neither has a
realistic strategy for peace or even for ending the violence.

For all these reasons, from its very inception Sharon's disengagement
plan had little more than a 50 percent chance of reaching fruition. Now
it has even less. Labor may be losing interest in a coalition. We have
only begun to see the settler lobby and its allies in action, thwarting
disengagement through political, legal and even violent means. Both the
IDF and the Israel Police are already intimidated by the task of
physically removing settlers, each seeking to dump the job on the other.
The Egyptians, who might have elegantly greased the wheels of
disengagement, have practically maneuvered themselves out of a genuine
facilitator role by presenting impossible preconditions to both sides;
their heart doesn't seem to be in this enterprise either.

Granted, disengagement remains the only game in town. But Sharon is
apparently not up to the task.

