Q: What will be in your presentation?

A: I don't believe that it is appropriate to talk about what we
will be discussing before the court until it is made public.
Nevertheless, generally speaking we will be focusing on the obligations
of an occupying power to the occupied people and how Israel violated
those obligations.

Q: Would the Palestinians agree if the wall was built along
the green line?

A: We would prefer not to have a wall at all. Our idea of peace
is one without walls and borders. Nevertheless, if Israel wanted to
build a wall on the green line, that is certainly within its right. It
does not, however, have the right to build it within occupied territory
and in such a way that violates the rights of the occupied people whom
Israel is obligated to protect and not harm.

Q: What is the best result that you can hope for from the
hearings in The Hague?

A: Well, the International Court of Justice in The Hague has been
asked to provide an advisory opinion for guidance to member states. So
the real question is not what The Hague will say but what the member
states are going to do to actually implement whatever the court advises.
That is where I hope that states would change their policies and
actually adopt whatever the court rules.

Q: Is there a precedent for this action?

A: It is one of the main mandates of the court to provide
advisory opinions when asked by the General Assembly, which it has done.
This is certainly within the court's mandate and within their
jurisdiction. They have never turned down a request to give an advisory
opinion.

Q: The Israelis are saying the international court has no
right to pass down an opinion. This is murmured by the Americans and the
Europeans as well. What do they base that opinion on?

A: That is not the position of the Europeans and the Americans.
You have not seen the European and American submissions. Please don't
believe whatever the Israelis tell you with respect to the US and EU
positions. I think you should wait until you see that. I can say that I
don't know if there is a single country other than Israel that approves
of the wall in the fashion that it is being built.

Israel's view is that no law applies to it. It has never abided by
international law. Israel has taken the view that it can do whatever it
wants with impunity. Unfortunately, that is the international
community's fault. It has taught Israel that international legal
standards do not apply to it. Hopefully, this will be the beginning of a
change in that policy.

Q: What issue is really at stake here?

A: I think we should focus on the fact that this is not a
question of the wall per se, and Israel's right to build a wall, but a
question of the legal consequences of Israel building the wall in
occupied territory in such a way that violates the rights of the
occupied people. The importance of this hearing is that is re-injects
and reaffirms that this not a conflict between two equal parties who
simply have to negotiate. This is an issue between occupier and occupied
and we seem to have forgotten that. This is not a conflict between two
equal parties with equal negotiating leverage. You should not forget
that as an occupier, Israel is subject to international legal standards
which it has violated.

