When Israel negotiated armistice lines with Jordan and Egypt at Rhodes
in 1948-49, it insisted that certain Arab villages and lands in the
Samaria region of the West Bank be annexed to it, in order to expand
Israel's "narrow waist" in the Hadera-Netanya area. In so doing it
consciously undertook to increase the Palestinian Arab population of
Israel in order to improve its territorial situation. It even threatened
to renew hostilities with Jordan and Iraq (whose expeditionary force was
in the West Bank), unless the Arab side agreed to move the green line
further to the east.

Similarly, a year or so later, in the course of abortive peace talks in
Lausanne, and under pressure from Washington, Prime Minister David Ben
Gurion offered to repatriate 100,000 or even 200,000 Palestinian
refugees from the Gaza Strip in return for peace and Israeli annexation
of the Strip. Such a step, had it been accepted by the Arabs, would have
eliminated the green line with Gaza right up to the Israel-Egypt
international border.

This line of thinking reflected Israeli leaders' understanding of their
strategic dilemma at the time. Hundreds of thousands of Jewish refugees
were pouring into the country, and the demographic balance did not
appear to be a problem. On the other hand, the 1948 War, Israel's War of
Independence in which it fought with its back very much to the sea, had
taught it that territory counts. So in its early years it preferred
geography over demography.

Territory counted in the 1967 Six-Day War, too, which brought the West
Bank and the Gaza Strip under Israeli occupation. At the time, few
Israelis were bothered by the long-term demographic consequences of
Israeli rule over the Palestinian residents of the territories across
the Green Line. The occupied lands seemed more important as strategic
depth and as bargaining cards for future negotiations.

The post-war euphoria, together with the Israeli reading of United
Nations Security Council Resolution 242, with its emphasis on "secure
and recognized boundaries" and "withdrawal . . . from territories
occupied" (i.e., not all the territories) and its reference only to
"every State in the area" (i.e., not the Palestinian territories, which
were legally not part of any state), encouraged Israeli policymakers to
think in terms of future borders very different from the green line, and
nourished the renascent Land of Israel movement which gave birth to the
settlements.

That the green line has survived the ensuing 35 years, and has become
virtually synonymous with 242 in the eyes of the international
community, is testimony to Arab and particularly Palestinian
persistence. The green line, after all, is not an international
border--unlike Israel's borders with Egypt, Jordan, Syria and
Lebanon--and the Palestine Liberation Organization only arrived at the
advocacy of a two state solution based on 242 in the late 1980s.

Yet successive Israeli governments, including that of Ehud Barak which
attempted in 2000 to negotiate final status with the PLO, tried and
failed to establish some alternative principal as the agreed point of
departure for territorial negotiations. So sacred was the green line to
Palestinian negotiators at Camp David II in July 2000 and at Taba in
January 2001, that they insisted on a dunam-for-dunam, one-on-one land
exchange in return for any settlements Israel sought to annex.

Since Camp David II the Palestinians themselves, by dwelling on the
right of return of 1948 refugees, have succeeded in calling into
question their commitment to a two state solution. Israel, in turn, has
successfully persuaded most of the western world and part of the Arab
world that the PLO cannot have both a two state solution, based on a
Jewish state and an Arab state, and an Israeli declaration that in
principle large numbers of Palestinians can repopulate the Jewish state,
thereby in effect rendering it a binational state.

But PLO insistence on the right of return was also instrumental in
persuading Israelis that their primary strategic problem with the
Palestinians today is demographic rather than geographic. If, today, we
could revisit the Rhodes talks and renegotiate the green line, we would
almost certainly agree to live with a narrower waist, on condition that
fewer rather than more Palestinians become Israeli citizens.

Indeed, when negotiations are resumed, there will be considerable
sentiment on the Israeli side to compensate Palestine for the annexation
of settlement blocs with at least a one-on-one swap, on condition that
the territories on the Israeli side of the green line that are included
in Palestine contain some of the very same Arab towns and villages that
Israel insisted on annexing in 1948.

