For the last fifty years of this century-old struggle, Palestinians have
watched Israel's military advantage improve dramatically. The internal
cohesion of the Jewish state, buttressed by the experience of Jews in
fascist Europe during World War II, and the heavy arming of Israel in
crucial periods by Britain, France and the United States, all were
reasons for the growing military imbalance.

But even though Israel has come out on top in every war with the Arab
states except the October War and the military incursion into Lebanon,
Israel has yet to solve the Palestinian problem. When interest in a
territorial compromise peaked on the Israeli side, it did not find a
corresponding partner among the Arab states, primarily because Israel
failed to seek a deal with Palestinians. When Palestinians became
interested in the late seventies, the Israeli right wingers Menachem
Begin and Yitzhak Shamir had stolen the day.

Only in the last ten years, after the November 1988 meeting of the
Palestine National Council in Algiers and the defeat of Israel's Likud
after the Madrid conference, have there been decisive elements on both
sides simultaneously seeking a territorial solution. Still, the search
for a non-military solution has failed. The Oslo agreement did not
address crucial final status issues, transitional mechanisms for
resolving conflict and--most importantly--the main obstacle to the
territorial solution, i.e., Jewish settlements and the confiscation of
land to establish those settlements. The result has been the return by
the Sharon government to a military solution, with devastating results
on the Palestinian infrastructure and economy.

Like most Palestinians, I see Israeli military rule as a colonial rule.
As in the experience of most liberation movements, Palestinians have the
right to resist this military rule by all means. The question is, how
does one use that option? Does one continue to use it when the
overwhelming odds are in favor of our protagonist and when there is
total Arab acquiescence, defacto if not political, to Israeli hegemony?

The use of violence against Israeli civilians in the form of suicide
bombings or other attacks is counterproductive. People who legitimize it
see it as a way to get revenge and debilitate the Israelis. But if one
wants to address the issue politically, then obviously the liabilities
of this tactic far outnumber the assets.

In addition to the moral objections to the repugnant and unacceptable
attacks on Israeli civilians, these acts tend to mobilize the Israeli
population against any territorial peace initiative, as well as
legitimize--in the eyes of the international public--acts of state
terror against Palestinian civilians and combatants alike. Second, they
reinforce the hegemony of the extreme Israel right; and finally, they
appear to alter the political objective of Palestinians from one seeking
a two state solution within internationally-recognized boundaries to one
in which there is no distinction made between the territories occupied
by Israel in 1967 and the rest of the state of Israel. When that
happens, it becomes impossible for any Israeli to come to terms with an
historic resolution of the conflict. If the settlement of Ofra and Tel
Aviv are considered equal combat areas, then we Palestinians must either
have the ability to fight this all-conclusive battle--or rethink our
strategy.

Here one recalls the efficacy and moral superiority of the means of
struggle used by Palestinians in the first uprising. Street
demonstrations and confrontations with the army, commodity boycotts and
boycott of the civil administration, as well as more lethal clashes with
the army all achieved tremendous support for Palestinians throughout the
world and within Israel and even succeeded in mobilizing a large segment
of the Israeli army itself. People realized that Israel could no longer
govern this country. I think that if this intifada had continued with
attacks inside the occupied territories then Palestinians would have
enjoyed overwhelming support. As it stands now, return to this strategy,
while essential, will be much more difficult.

The reason that this approach was abandoned in this intifada was in part
due to the national movement Fateh and the Palestinian Authority's
succumbing to the desperate and despairing messianic approach adopted by
Hamas and Islamic Jihad. This approach sees salvation for Palestinians
either in the afterlife, or after a prolonged bloody conflict that would
last for generations--with the encounter between the Crusades and us as
its historical antecedent. Its results will not be seen in our lifetime.
It might well end in the total defeat of Israelis, but it could just as
easily end up in the dispersal and second catastrophe of the Palestinian
people.

This is the reason for our collective appeal published this week in Al
Quds newspaper: to open up a public debate over the politics, morality
and expediency of attacking civilians as an interment of warfare.

As public intellectuals or political activists, we will not be able to
convince our adversaries within the Palestinian national movement
through the means of this statement alone. Any rethinking of the
Palestinian strategy must be based on offering the Palestinian people
hope that there is a political solution. That can only come through
external intervention that emphasizes the importance of two states, a
timetable to bring that about and mechanisms of implementation. This
should be jointly proposed by the US and the European Union, and
underwritten by the United Nations.

What Palestinians can do themselves is to reach out to Israelis who are
willing to energize and relaunch a peace movement based on Israeli
withdrawal and the dismantling of settlements. But again, these two
processes have to move in tandem in order to be successful--a political
movement from outside with mechanisms for implementation and a movement
among Palestinians to reach out to the Israeli public and create an
alternative to this right-wing Israeli government.

