In the current Israeli-Palestinian conflict, both leaders--Israeli Prime
Minister Sharon and Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat--appear to believe
in the use of force.

Arafat has relied on some degree of force throughout most of the past 37
years, since the first Fatah attack on Israel on January 1, 1965. In
recent years, during the Oslo process, Palestinian violence was
frequently limited to stone throwing. Over the past 21 months the
element of suicide bombing has grown, with Fatah increasingly involved
and Arafat actively aiding and abetting violent organizational efforts.
In the course of this escalation Arafat has lost credibility and support
among many fellow Arab leaders, most Israelis, and much of the world,
while Palestinian society is being progressively barbarized through a
grim ritual of child sacrifice and murder that has few parallels in the
annals of violent insurrection.

Sharon appears to have adopted a strategy that is almost exclusively
military: exploiting Palestinian violence in order to reoccupy all or
most of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. He believes in permanent Israeli
military control, both direct and indirect, over these territories.
Since he requires broad Israeli and American support to pursue this
agenda, his strategy advances incrementally: each new wave of
Palestinian atrocities justifies a new, deeper and more lasting Israeli
incursion.

There is no evidence that suicide bombings have "softened" Israelis for
compromise. Further, only at the most superficial level of analysis
could one make the case that 37 years of violence have "paid off" for
Arafat. Indeed, Palestinians could have had a state several times over
(the 1947 partition plan, the 1979 autonomy framework, the 2000 Camp
David/Taba process) if they had only abjured the use of force and agreed
to compromise; and with each missed opportunity, the territory remaining
for their state is reduced. Israelis and others would be no less aware
of the injustice and stupidity of building settlements in the West Bank
and Gaza if Palestinians had relied on mass passive resistance over the
past 30 years rather than violent attacks.

Nor is there evidence that force is paying off today for Sharon. Each
new and more violent Israeli response to Palestinian terrorism fails to
instill the degree of punishment and deterrence that Palestinians
allegedly "require" to change their approach. On the contrary, it
produces yet more suicide bombers. The inexorable logic on the Israeli
side is to ensure, against the weight of all accumulated experience,
that the next response is yet more violent and decisive. True, greater
justice is on the Israeli side; there is no moral equivalency between
deliberate targeting of Israeli civilians by Palestinians and the
inadvertent deaths of Palestinian civilians in the course of Israeli
retaliatory acts. But this does not render those retaliatory acts any
more effective.

Undoubtedly, one can cite instances in our recent history where a
preference for violence over diplomacy has apparently paid off. Could
Israel conceivably have relied on impotent international reassurances in
May-June 1967, rather than going to war to defend itself? Would Israel
and Egypt have entered into a peace process in 1977 were it not for the
tragic legacy of the October 1973 War? Should Israel have avoided
destroying Saddam Hussein's Osiraq nuclear reactor in 1981, thereby
setting back Iraqi plans to develop nuclear weapons for years, and
relied instead on the toothless international nuclear monitoring of the
day?

But there is nothing to indicate that the current situation fits this
pattern. Conceivably, in view of the growing communications and
emotional gap separating Palestinians and Israelis, a peace process is
not possible in the immediate future. The current cycle of violence
seems impossible for us to break on our own, while there appears to be
little near-term hope of decisive intervention by a strong third party
like the US. But at the very least, both leaders have to present to
their own citizens and to the other side realistic political programs
that could serve as an incentive to begin to stop the violence. Yet
neither Sharon nor Arafat does this convincingly, if at all.

Finally, Palestinians should take care not to misinterpret the current
tide of opinion among the Israeli public. Israelis, disappointed with
their Palestinian peace partner (and their own leadership), are
increasingly demanding to dismantle provocative outlying settlements and
build strong fences along a line of defense roughly following the Green
Line plus the adjacent settlement blocs. This trend reflects a healthy
Israeli sense of self-interest: control less Palestinian territory, deal
more effectively with suicide bombers, ensure Israel's long-term
demographic future as a Jewish state.

Palestinians will be mistaken if they interpret this unilateral drive as
a sign that terrorism is paying off, that Israelis are weak, and that
yet more violence will produce more far-reaching gains. Palestinians
made this mistake in assessing the unilateral Israeli withdrawal from
Lebanon in May 2000. They are paying for that mistake to this
day.

