The green line, the boundary separating Israel from the West Bank, has
retained its significance in all the negotiations concerning the
demarcation of a boundary for a future Palestinian State. At the most,
it is possible that the green line will be modified to take into account
some of the Israeli settlements which are in close proximity to the
line. But despite the many geographical changes which have taken place
around the line during the course of the past 35 years, it is still
perceived by many policymakers as the default line for future boundary
demarcation.

The green line was drawn up at the Rhodes Armistice talks in 1948-49.
The precise demarcation of the line reflected the military realities of
the time following the Israel's War of Independence. The implementation
of the boundary gave rise to numerous functional problems for
Arab-Palestinian villages and townships. Some Arab residents of the
region became Israeli citizens, while others became stateless under
Jordanian administration. Many villages on the West Bank side of the
boundary were cut off from their fields on the Israeli side. Others were
no longer able to travel beyond the new boundary to their jobs in places
such as Jaffa, Ramla and Lod, thus causing substantial economic
dislocation for many of the Arab inhabitants.

The "opening" of the boundary in 1967 brought about a new geographic
orientation. During the 1970s and 1980s, tens of thousands of
Palestinians from the West Bank crossed the boundary to work inside
Israel, as did Israeli settlers who retained their jobs in the Israeli
cities. In the other direction, many Israelis crossed the line,
especially on weekends and holidays, to shop in the markets of Qalqilya
and East Jerusalem and to use other services (such as dentists and car
mechanics) which were offered at a considerably cheaper price than
inside Israel itself.

Despite these trans-boundary movements, the line remained an important
point of separation between the two territories. Since no Israeli
government attempted to annex any part of the West Bank, the green line
retained its administrative functions, with the legal status of the
residents on both sides of the "non-existent" line remaining separate
and subject to Israeli and Jordanian law respectively.

These functional realities contrasted strongly with the public
statements made by many Israeli politicians to the effect that the green
line no longer existed--a policy reflected in the decision not to show
the green line on maps of Israel issued by the Surveyors Department or
in atlases used in Israeli schools and universities.

Neither did the creation of regional councils for the benefit of the
Israeli settlements in the West Bank tamper with the existing
administrative divide. Even where it would have seemed to be more
logical to annex some of the settlements to municipal authorities on the
Israeli side of the line, this did not take place as it would have
signaled the extension of Israeli civilian law to the occupied
territories, an act which is strictly forbidden under international law.

With the return of violence following the first Intifada beginning in
1987, the green line became even more apparent. Whenever curfews or
closures were imposed on the occupied territories, the road blocks were
established at those points which had been the boundary. As Palestinians
were gradually prevented from entering the Israeli market place, it was
the green line which determined the point beyond which they were no
longer allowed to move. For Israelis, the apprehension of traveling in
the West Bank and Gaza Strip created a geography of fear in which people
no longer crossed the green line. It may not always have been clearly
marked on the maps, but most Israelis developed an intuitive
understanding of just where the boundary was and ceased to travel beyond
the line.

The recent construction of walls and fences along parts of the West Bank
has taken place in close proximity to the green line (with deviations
which include some Israeli settlements on the Israeli side of the
fence), thus creating, de facto, a physical barrier which may yet prove
to be the future boundary separating Israel from a Palestinian state.

For its part, the line separating the Gaza Strip from Israel has
remained permanent and has, for the past 10 years, been enclosed by a
fence clearly demarcating the limits of this region. In the Jerusalem
area, it is the municipal boundaries of the city, as determined by the
Israeli government after 1967, which define the course of the boundary,
although this may change even further in the lead up to renewed
negotiations, as the government attempts to draw surrounding Jewish
communities (especially Ma'aleh Adumim) into the Jerusalem municipal area.

The history of the green line is testament to the powerful impact of
arbitrary and artificial boundaries, even over a relatively short period
of time. It served as a political line of separation--between Israel and
the Jordanian administered territories--for no more than 18 years, half
the time that has passed since it was "opened" in 1967. Yet, its
retention as a line of administrative separation, coupled with the
events of the past decade during which it has re-emerged as a barrier
preventing movement of people and goods in both directions, have only
strengthened its impact. If, and when, a political resolution of the
conflict is reached, the green line--with some minor deviations--has the
greatest likelihood of constituting the formal international boundary
between two independent states.

