While the British and American war against Iraq is so far not having any
direct and immediate impact on the Palestinian-Israel conflict, we are
already seeing signs on the horizon of the war's long-term strategic
results. One of the first possible casualties of this war could be the
Quartet, the high-level Middle East working group composed of the United
States, European Union, Russia and the United Nations.

Quartet efforts are perceived by Palestinians--and Arabs, in general--as
a move in the right direction because they minimize the US monopoly over
the peace process and introduce diplomatic efforts closer to the
requirements of international law. Unilateral American diplomatic
attempts have--in contrast--not succeeded, due largely to the
extravagant United States bias towards Israel and a subsequent lack of
neutrality in dealing with the two sides. The deterioration in relations
between the US and other major world actors that preceded this war will
no doubt leave its damaging fingerprints on Quartet initiatives that
were to date the best attempts at building a Middle East peace.

This unsanctioned war has also dealt a severe blow to international law,
the role of the United Nations and the resolutions of its Security
Council. Indeed, the war might be remembered in history as the turning
point away from the growing strength and respect garnered by a concerted
international community, towards a situation where the lone superpower
is not only neglecting international legality but replacing it with
unilateralism. The Middle East peace process is based on international
legality and the need to adhere to and implement the relevant Security
Council resolutions. Now the very country supervising the peace process
has turned away from the international forum and decided to go it alone.

Further, there is no doubt that the shift in international attention,
that of both media and diplomats, away from the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict is going to reduce the international pressures that have
maintained a modicum of calm. Even more sobering is the thought that
heavy casualties inflicted in Iraq may serve to further justify in the
eyes of the international public Israel's attacks on the Palestinian
civilians it occupies.

The recent hints by US President George W. Bush and British Prime
Minister Tony Blair, as well as diplomats like Miguel Moratinos and
David Satterfield, have been encouraging in that they dared to mention
the Middle East conflict at this very tense moment. But they were not
reassuring enough.

For one, the comments from lower American officials attempting to put a
positive spin on Bush's statements were immediately corrected rightward
by Israeli sources close to the US administration. The resulting
assessment has been that any new diplomatic push will not take place
until after the Iraq war, which can reasonably be expected to take
longer than optimistic first estimations. This delay will have a direct
impact on the new Palestinian prime minister. If our new government
leader, despite his best intentions, is unable to deliver any
improvements to his people--and he will not be able to deliver anything
until the renewal of the peace process--this will negatively reflect on
the public's perception of both him and the peace process itself.

Some analysts are trying to compare current events in the Middle East to
the aftermath of the first Gulf War, which was characterized by George
Bush Sr.'s immediate jumpstarting of Middle East talks. Unfortunately,
these assessments appear incorrect. While a peace process renewal would
be positively received in the region and neutralize some of the growing
anti-American sentiment, there are several factors that make it seem a
mirage. First, this US government is allied in a way never seen before
with its right-wing Likud counterparts in Israel. Second, the elder Bush
exited the Gulf War with very high approval ratings, while his son is
heading into a difficult conflict with moderate support and a teetering
economy. That is why Palestinians have admittedly low expectations for
US diplomacy after the war.

