The events of Rafah and the Gaza question must be viewed within the
broader context of changes in the mainstream Jewish public in Israel and
its attitude toward the Palestinians and the Arab world. The two
paradigms that mainstream Jews had believed in for decades recently
collapsed. One was based on the hope of establishing in the entirety of
the Greater Land of Israel a shared Jewish-Arab political entity; the
other, on the partition of the land between Jews and Arabs in an
historic compromise ("peace"). Both were based on the assessment that
they served the "real interests" of each side. The first lost the
adherence of mainstream Jews following the intifada in the late 1980s.
The second lost their trust when the structural failure of the Oslo
illusion became evident.

Every generation apparently needs to learn these lessons anew.
Paradoxically, in an earlier generation, the pessimistic Zionist
conclusion was articulated by a man who had placed peace with the Arab
residents of the country at the top of his order of priorities. It was
the founder of "Brit Shalom", Arthur Rupin, who formulated in his diary
in 1931 a sad conclusion that is today equally applicable to the state
of relations between Israel and the Palestinians: "What we can get from
the Arabs we don't need, and what we need we cannot get [from them]."

The mainstream of the Jewish public today understands that Israel has to
disengage from the Palestinian population in order to maintain a nation
state that is both Jewish and democratic. Since there is no Palestinian
partner for an historic compromise that is prepared to abandon both
terrorism and the demand for "return", Israel must act unilaterally and
withdraw from the heavily populated heartland. Israel will withdraw to a
border it will determine unilaterally in accordance with the demographic
reality, incorporating the three settlement blocs where most of the
settlers dwell. Along this line a physical barrier is being erected,
designed to terminate the "creeping return" of hundreds of thousands of
Palestinians into Israel, to reduce Israel's vulnerability to
Palestinian terrorism, and to afford Israelis an acceptable quality of
life and standard of living. This barrier, the fence, enjoys public
support in Israel primarily as a defense against terrorism, but its
significance goes far deeper. In recent decades the entire way of life
of the Jewish population had been dictated by its intimate contact with
the Palestinians. The Jews have come to understand that the illegal
Palestinian migration, as well as the crime and the corruption from the
territories, are no less detrimental, in the long run, to their way of
life than the terrorism. In recent years Prime Minister Ariel Sharon,
one of the most prominent proponents of the Greater Israel paradigm, has
also reached similar conclusions. His acceptance of partition, acquiesce
in a Palestinian state and even willingness to dismantle settlements
does not derive from hope for peace, but rather from despair regarding
the chances of historic compromise as well as from recognition that the
status quo endangers the democratic nation state of the Jewish people.
His plan for unilateral disengagement from the Gaza Strip and northern
Samaria rests on the assumption that the Palestinians are not a
potential partner to a "two states for two peoples" compromise, and that
Israel cannot wait until (if ever) such a partner emerges.

Sharon's disengagement plan enjoys the massive support of the general
Israeli public, and of the Likud voters, but Likud members rejected it.
While some of the plan's opponents ideologically reject uprooting of
settlements, there are many, notably within the security community, who
are mainly concerned lest the image of Israel fleeing the territories
encourage more terrorism. Acutely aware that the image of Israel
"fleeing" Lebanon due to Hizballah terrorism contributed to the war
initiated by the Palestinians in 2000, they fear that unilateral
departure from Gaza is liable to promote even worse acts of terrorism in
the West Bank (perhaps even among the Arab citizens of Israel).

The Rafah operation is intended not only to strike at terrorists, but
primarily to enhance Israel's capacity to deal with them following its
departure from the Gaza Strip. The key is the weapons supply conduit
along the Egyptian border. The main objective is to expand Israeli
control over the ridiculously narrow strip of land that separates Egypt
from Gaza, through which weapons are smuggled to the Palestinians. The
byproduct of a resolute operation in Gaza is a message to the
Palestinians that Israel is determined in its struggle against terrorism
and is creating the conditions that will enable it to meet this
challenge for as long as it takes.

The cost of such determined action is additional damage to Israel's
image. But this issue too must be seen within its wider context. The
media, European media in particular, present such a convoluted and
distorted image of Israel's struggle against Palestinian terrorism that
Israel no longer has anything to lose. If the fear of such damage to her
image deters Israel from taking needed action in time, terrorism will
only be stepped up to a point where more drastic counter measures are
called for. Those measures, in turn, will certainly cause even worse
damage to Israel's image.

Unilateral disengagement is inevitable because all other options are
unacceptable. The offensive against Palestinian terrorism will persist,
to demonstrate that terrorism has set Palestinian national objectives
back rather than allowing Palestinians to dictate Israeli policy. This
requires steadfastness and stamina. Israelis have demonstrated in the
last few years that they have more of those qualities then anyone
expected.

