Some of Israel's limited objectives regarding Rafah are problematic but
nevertheless achievable, at least in the short term. But its broader
objectives are not achievable.

Certainly the plan to prevent the export of terrorism from the Gaza
Strip, once evacuated, can be enhanced by reducing Palestinian
capabilities of importing weaponry by means of tunnels. The tunnels can
be uncovered and destroyed, the tunnel diggers and tunneling
entrepreneurs arrested. The Philadelphi road can be widened by
destroying additional Palestinian houses, thereby ensuring that future
tunnels will have to span a far greater distance. Just as Israel's
security fence works well against suicide bombers, so physical barriers
like a wider no-man's land and deep ditches can be made to work against
tunneling.

Israel will continue to pay a heavy price for these preventive
activities in terms of international opprobrium. This is particularly
true insofar as the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) will have to revisit
Rafah periodically in order to ensure that new tunnels are not being
dug, while the Philadelphi road will remain a focus of conflict even
after disengagement. Nor will Egypt be a willing collaborator here: the
Egyptians do not intend to be drawn by Israel into armed confrontation
with Palestinian arms smugglers on their side of the border; they prefer
that Israel bear this burden.

Beyond the immediate issue of the tunnels--rendered genuinely urgent by
intelligence that katyusha rockets capable of hitting Ashkelon were
about to be brought into the Gaza Strip via the Rafah tunnels--a second
objective of Israel's current offensive is to restore its deterrent
profile and project an image of strength in the aftermath of successful
Palestinian attacks on Israeli army armored personnel carriers (APCs) in
the Gaza Strip that left 11 IDF soldiers dead. The current
Israeli-Palestinian exchange of blows is over strength, deterrence and
disengagement, and can be traced to the Palestinian suicide bombing in
Ashdod port a few months ago. The IDF concluded from that attack that
Hamas aspired to present itself as having chased Israel out of Gaza.
Accordingly it sought to ensure that Palestinians see Israel as
departing from a position of strength. This led to the targeted killings
of Hamas leaders Yassin and Rantisi. But it did not prevent the next
round: Islamic Jihad's successful attacks on the APCs.

Hence the perceived need, once again, to "send a message of strength".
This is a problematic venture. At the end of the day, no matter how much
damage we do in Gaza prior to our departure, Palestinian militants will
indeed conclude that we dismantled settlements there because we only
understand the language of force. That is the inevitable cost of the
folly of building the settlements in the first place. But it pales
alongside the strategic benefits of disengagement: reducing the
occupation with all its ills, and beginning to roll back the settlements
that so endanger Israel's future as a Jewish and a democratic state.
That is why disengagement remains worthwhile, whatever the military
score inside the Gaza Strip.

Yet another, broader objective of the occupation of Rafah can be traced
directly to Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. He believes that the use of
massive Israeli force can compel the Palestinians to capitulate, and
that leaders will then emerge who at least passively acquiesce in his
territorial goals. It was clear from the moment Israel commenced its
reoccupation of the West Bank two years ago that Gaza's turn would come.
Here, as always, Palestinian militants helpfully provided the
provocation that justifies or at least rationalizes the Israeli
operation. In this endeavor Sharon can draw encouragement from the
radical reduction of terrorism in the West Bank brought abut by Israeli
occupation and incursion policies. Nor does this reoccupation approach
contradict Sharon's concept of disengagement, insofar as it is intended
to ensure that those areas of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank that
Israel leaves will remain quiescent.

The Rafah operation might at least temporarily produce some positive
results--for Israeli security and for the disengagement plan. But there
remain two serious problems with the entire Israeli approach in Gaza.

One is imagery. There is simply no way to invade a teeming and hostile
city of 150,000 residents in the global media age and make it look good.
When an IDF Radio reporter, himself a soldier, broadcasts live from
Rafah that the Palestinian families fleeing their destroyed homes with a
few meager belongings on their backs "look like the Nakba" (the
"disaster" of the creation of the Palestinian refugee problem in
1948)--and this, two days after May 15 Nakba Day--then we can hardly
complain when the rest of the world, the non-combatant world which
insists that the traditional rules of war apply to the fight against
terrorism, accuses us of breaking those rules.

The other problem is more substantive. Israel's military operations in
the Gaza Strip, as in the West Bank, continue to reflect a lack of any
realistic strategy for peace on the part not only of Ariel Sharon, but
of Yasser Arafat and George W. Bush as well. Without such a strategy, no
genuine progress is likely in Rafah or elsewhere. Under these
circumstances, reoccupation and destruction in Rafah do not produce an
alternative, docile leadership; they just produce more Arab anger and
resentment.

