By the time the United States commenced its war against Iraq last week,
it left behind considerable international wreckage: in the United
Nations, in the Atlantic Alliance, and within the European Union. How
the US will emerge from the war is not at all clear. But the sum total
of this diplomatic damage to the global system is likely to be
translated, at least in the near term, into a reduction in effective
international efforts to deal with the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

While the war is still raging and its full international ramifications
are as yet far from certain, we can only speculate about the fallout for
Israelis and Palestinians. But because the stakes are so high, we can
and must engage--cautiously, to be sure--in such speculation.

Both the EU and the UN have clearly been weakened by the countdown to
the war. What used to be called the EU's joint foreign and security
policy is now in a shambles, with France, Germany and Belgium by and
large pitted against the other member and candidate states over Iraq.
While the EU does ostensibly continue to agree on a policy toward the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict--indeed, consistent European agreement on a
two-state solution involving the PLO goes back more than 20 years--its
inability to maintain a consensus regarding Iraq could conceivably
overflow into the Arab-Israel sphere as well.

In the UN, the authority of the Security Council has been seriously
impaired. How it will be structured in future, how it will make
decisions regarding Israel and Palestine, and how effective those
decisions will be, remain to be seen. But the near term prognosis
appears to be reduced effectiveness.

Turning to the key player, the US, a number of complex and diverse
scenarios for the post-Iraq period bespeak a wide variety of
possibilities. To begin with, Washington enters the war in Iraq
relatively isolated on the international scene, having exercised
strikingly poor diplomatic judgment in advancing its global
agenda--beginning with its rejection of environmental and arms control
treaty obligations, through its failures in the Security Council over
Iraq and the inspection regime, and down to US Secretary of Defense
Donald Rumsfeld's disparaging remarks about America's traditional
friends in Europe. But this same willful alienation by Washington of the
global community and the multilateral approach also bespeaks an
extraordinary sense of power in the US, cultivated particularly by the
neoconservative lobby.

This contradiction is reflected in several possible scenarios. Thus, if
the US triumphs handily in Iraq and manages to deal effectively with
potential internal Iraqi frictions and external complications, the
administration's disdain for the Europeans, the Arabs and the UN is
liable to grow. This points to a hawkish agenda regarding the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict that dovetails with that of Israeli Prime
Minister Sharon.

In contrast, if the conquering American forces find themselves
hopelessly embroiled in Iraqi civil wars, tribal insurrections,
Shi'ite-Sunni and Turkish-Kurdish fights, and increased terrorism and
incitement, the US might seek to placate the surrounding Arab world and
the Europeans by adopting an energetic peace process agenda that implies
the exercise of pressure on Israel--for example regarding a settlement
freeze and an initial withdrawal to the September 28, 2000 lines--as
well as on the Palestinians.

We already witnessed a strange interaction between unilateralist and
multilateralist tendencies in US policy regarding the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict when, on March 14, President Bush made a
special policy pronouncement
                                              regarding the roadmap
                                                . On the one hand Bush
declared that the roadmap would be presented earlier than previously
indicated: rather than being postponed until after the war, it would be
delivered to the two sides as soon as the Palestinians confirmed the
appointment of a new prime minister with genuine authority. This was
seen as a way of strengthening the hand of reluctant and troubled allies
like Britain, Turkey and Arab regimes that were being criticized for
neglecting the conflict in favor of Bush's Iraq agenda.

But on the other hand, Bush's announcement downplayed the role of the
Quartet and appeared to invite further Israeli attempts to amend the
roadmap--a position opposed by Washington's European, Russian and UN
partners. This weakened the very same actors who had been calling for a
more forthright US multilateral policy on the Israeli-Palestinian issue.

Then too, conceivably none of this will be relevant. The administration
may simply be too busy after Iraq with both domestic and international
challenges to get involved with our conflict. Bush, after all, has never
really evinced any interest in making peace between Israelis and
Palestinians. And with the EU and the UN clearly weakened by the events
of recent months, it behooves Israelis and Palestinians to remind
themselves that historically, most real breakthroughs to peace in the
Middle East--Egyptian leader Anwar Sadat's trip to Jerusalem, the Oslo
accords, the Israel-Jordan peace--took place bilaterally, and secretly,
behind the backs of the international community.

Because both an enhanced international role and a secret, bilateral
breakthrough are not likely--neither is an Israeli-Palestinian peace
process.

