Q: "Arab diplomacy" in the context of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict--a new phenomenon?

A: The phenomenon begins as early as 1937, when a conference of
Arab heads of state adopted the Palestinian cause. This represented the
bankruptcy of the Palestinian movement, its strategic failure to
successfully rationalize its relations with the Zionist movement. The
Arab League, from its original seven members to the present 22,
developed a system of consensus according to the most extreme position,
always negative. This was the case in '47 and again in '67, at the
Khartoum summit. Until the Saudi initiative the League always rejected
the UN partition resolution of 1947 and played a negative role.

Alongside the Palestinian issue, other matters never occupied the League
in an orderly way, but only symbolically and superficially. We are
dealing with a culture that emphasizes words rather than content. The
low point was the League's endorsement in '76 of the Syrian takeover of
Lebanon. Nor did the war in Yemen during the '60s shatter this phony
leniency.

Q: The Saudi initiative, approved by the Arab League in March
2002, is really such an exceptional event?

A: At the tactical level the Saudis were buying American goods with
Israeli currency. But this is an irreversible act, a diplomatic
milestone and, in some ways, penance for past sins. This is the basis
for continued dialogue.

Q: What brought about the change in the League's behavior?

A: The turning point was the 1991 Gulf War. A rift formed in the
Arab front, along with a readiness to link up with the US, and the
shattering of a bogus tradition. The big change was the collapse of the
USSR; the game of playing off the two blocs was over. The Iraqi invasion
of Kuwait was a brutal conquest of territory that was seen as a
dangerous precedent. Since it did not involve Israel, there was less
need for a consensus.

Q: In parallel with the Saudi initiative, Egypt, Jordan and
Saudi Arabia are functioning as a kind of "club" that exercises
restraint and avoids harsh retribution toward Israel despite the
Intifada, and that cooperates with the Quartet, and particularly the US,
in the search for a solution. How do you explain both these countries'
reserve and their activism?

A: Each member of this triangle delivers different goods. Each has
its specific attitude toward Israel and the US. Egypt is the central
country with whom peace has stood the test, despite the isolation that
the Arab states initially imposed. The physical barrier--the Sinai
Peninsula buffer--that separates Egypt and Israel, American financial
support, and Egypt's traditional leadership role, all enable Egypt to
avoid cutting ties, even if it has never activated most of its
agreements with us. Saudi Arabia is sitting on oil reserves and its
interest in protecting the regime is shared by the US. As for Jordan,
severing relations with Israel due to the Palestinian issue would open
the way for the complete Palestinization of the country, and would
constitute an admission that its overriding interest is Palestine, when
in fact Jordan shares broad strategic interests with Israel. But if this
triangle doesn't have an external "glue"--America--it cannot be expected
to register significant achievements.

Q: There is an inclination among certain circles in Israel
and the US, and even here and there in the Arab world, to treat the
Arabs as if they are paper tigers--for example, in the Iraqi context.

A: I don't agree with this concept. Within a Muslim world of 1.2
billion, the Arab world at its center enjoys broad cultural influence.
This is a world that places importance on ideals of honor; hence
language is important. If you insult it, you achieve nothing. An
arrogant American approach is liable to generate a transformation from
collective affront to personal humiliation, meaning more terrorism.

On the other hand, the search for an external savior by certain Arab
circles reflects disdain for their own society and an inclination always
to blame someone else for their troubles. If someone else is to blame,
then someone else has to fix things for them.

Q: One of the American demands of the Arabs is to replace
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat. This would require a radical change in
approach to the Palestinian issue. Could this happen?

A: It's not likely that an Arab neighbor of Palestine would
publicly call for the removal of Arafat, and in so doing debase the
symbol of Palestinian nationalism. This would constitute a major
upheaval in the Arab world. On the other hand, everything today is
discussed openly and debated publicly: it would be necessary for an
initial Arab leader to gather the personal courage and demand Arafat's
removal. It could happen.

The main problem is that in the Arab world, violence is acceptable as a
political and even individual weapon. Hence there is a fear of
presenting unorthodox views, coupled with a physical fear. People have
been killed throughout the Arab world for their views, not necessarily
by Palestinians, though Palestinians have employed this method more than
others--in Jordan, Lebanon and Europe.

