It is reasonable to assume that within 10 years at the most, there will
be a Palestinian state in nearly all of the West Bank and Gaza, with al
Quds (East Jerusalem) as its capital. It will have signed a peace treaty
with Israel. By 2025 all remnants of Israeli settlements built inside
what becomes the sovereign territory of Palestine will have disappeared,
and a broad program for the resettlement and rehabilitation of the 1948
refugees and their descendants will be well underway.

But this is likely to be a relatively cool peace, for a number of reasons.

First, and most significantly, the most fundamental antipathy toward
Israel within the Arab world will not have dissipated two decades hence.
Many Arabs, including many Palestinians, will still see Israelis as
foreigners who stole Arab land. The more fervent Muslims will still
consider Israel's very existence to constitute a desecration of Islamic
holy land. Israel's own vision of itself--as the legitimate expression
of the right of the Jewish people to a state in its historic
homeland--will still not be legitimized by most Arabs.

True, because Israelis and Palestinians live in such close
proximity--indeed, share, along with Jordanians, the same geostrategic
land unit--there will be numerous areas of almost mandatory close
cooperation, such as the water economy, ecological issues, shared ports
and airspace and the like. But there will also still be Palestinians who
express their resentment toward Israel in sporadic violence; some
Palestinian refugees will continue to cultivate an active longing for
homes long abandoned, just as some Israelis, former settlers and their
descendants, will foster irredentist movements that focus on the West
Bank. One of the challenges facing the Israeli and Palestinian
leaderships 23 years from now will be to find ways to channel these
emotions away from violence and toward mutual empathy.

Israeli-Palestinian relations will to a large degree be influenced by
the state of broader Israeli-Arab relations. Assuming Israel and Syria
have made their peace by 2025, this will go a long way toward
stimulating commercial relations between Israel and the wealthy Gulf
states (yes, they will still be wealthy 23 years from now), and this, in
turn, could reflect positively on the warmth of ties between Israelis
and Palestinians.

By the same token, the nature of existential threats directed toward
Israel from radical states will also influence Israeli-Palestinian ties
in 2025. If Israel feels it still must maintain a military presence in
West Bank early warning stations and in the air above the West Bank due
to threats from Iran and/or other countries to the east, this could be a
source of ongoing friction between Israel and Palestine years after they
sign a peace treaty.

Another critical issue will be Palestine's success in fostering economic
development and reducing its extremely high birthrate. The past decade
has demonstrated that even in the rough and tumble years of a sporadic
peace process, tens of thousands of Palestinians have "returned" to
Israel illegally for economic reasons. Even with the best of
international aid efforts, by 2025 there will continue to be serious
economic disparities between Israel and its neighbors, and the
Palestinian birth rate will not have dropped to levels achieved in other
overcrowded countries like Egypt. Hence Israel and Palestine are likely
to coexist in a kind of "north-south" tension, with Palestinians seeking
ways to enter Israel in order to improve their economic lot, and finding
a welcome among relatives in the Israeli Arab community. Israeli
authorities will seek to expel them and will be inclined to "build
walls" that separate Israel from its neighbors and maintain Israel's
demographic identity as a Jewish state.

This points to an internal Israeli dynamic that will affect
Israeli-Palestinian relations. Once a two state solution is instituted
and a Palestinian state is established, Israel will face the awesome
challenge of normalizing the minority status of its own Palestinian Arab
community within a Jewish state. Its success or failure in this endeavor
will have far-reaching ramifications for overall Israeli-Palestinian
relations. Certainly if the present trend of increasing alienation and
radicalization of Israeli Arabs continues, it will project negatively on
Israeli-Palestinian ties. Incidentally, a parallel though less acute
challenge following Israeli-Palestinian peace will be faced by Jordan,
about half of whose population is Palestinian.

If this description paints a somewhat bleak picture, it is not intended
to sound pessimistic. On the contrary, the trials and tribulations
projected here are an inevitable stage in the gradual process of
Israel's acceptance into the region. A warmer peace than that described
here will take not a single but several generations. How quickly it is
achieved will to a great extent be a function of Israeli and Palestinian
leadership.

