As the roadmap                                                  process
teeters near collapse, it is tempting to analyze the crisis in terms of
the mistakes of recent weeks: why did Palestinian Prime Minister Abbas
(Abu Mazen) and security chief Dahlan not act in time; should Israeli
Prime Minister Sharon have waited another day or two before renewing
targeted assassinations of Hamas leaders; would this or that concession
or gesture have made a difference?

In fact, the process was flawed from the outset. If the flaws aren't
rectified, prospects for the roadmap will remain slim--with or without
the parties' tactical errors.

First and foremost, the current Israeli and Palestinian national
leaderships are not up to the challenge. They carried out some
roadmap-mandated steps, such as partial withdrawal and a reduction in
incitement--but not the main ones. Abu Mazen understands the dangers to
the future of Palestine posed by terrorism, but it's all talk. In two
months he did not begin to translate his declarative strategic grasp of
the problem into deeds. One of the reasons is Yasir Arafat, who remains
the real leader. The assumption that the combination of the roadmap, the
hudna (ceasefire) and American support would catapult Abu Mazen into the
top leadership position proved false. Sadly, Arafat has won yet another
round.

On the Israeli side, Sharon has manipulated the roadmap and his
relations with the White House so as to continue to expand the
settlements and to compel the Palestinian Authority to accept his vision
of Israeli-Palestinian relations: Israel will control the land, while a
nascent Palestinian rump state controls the terrorists, and the US looks
on. He too has failed.

Sharon's approach also highlights the main flaw in the structure of the
roadmap: phase II, a provisional Palestinian state without defined
boundaries. The Palestinians fear, legitimately, that Sharon will seek
to entrap them in a state consisting of a collection of enclaves in the
West Bank, and then find excuses to avoid discussing final status.
Israel fears, also legitimately, that the provisional Palestinian state
will wage an ongoing struggle against it by citing the right of return.
Given that phase III also repeats the Oslo mistake of avoiding a clear
definition of the parameters of a Palestinian state, it is
understandable that neither side has found a strong incentive in the
roadmap to proceed beyond phase I. The Quartet drafters of this document
should have reduced it to two phases: first, stabilization, end of
terrorism, withdrawal and confidence-building measures; then, renewed
final status negotiations based on agreed parameters. They should have
learned from the demise of the Oslo process to avoid intermediate and
ambiguous phases.

Perhaps most distressing of all is the US performance. On the one hand,
the advent of the roadmap signaled the Bush administration's decision to
abandon its hands-off approach toward the Israeli-Palestinian conflict,
and get seriously involved. Against the backdrop of complications in
Iraq, Washington appeared finally to understand that the outcome of the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is of major importance for its strategic
interests in the Middle East. It shook off its three Quartet partners
(the European Union, the United Nations and Russia), merged the roadmap
with the Bush vision of June 24, 2002
                                            , and took over. Bush
himself came to the region to launch the process; he went so far as to
tell Middle East leaders that he was "on a mission from God" to end the
conflict and produce a viable two state solution.

Yet the administration seems to think that for the most part this
process will run itself; it underestimated the leadership weaknesses on
both sides, along with the huge gap in trust and confidence separating
them. A US monitoring team of talented and dedicated public servants was
dispatched to the region--but it was too small, arrived too late, had
too little experience dealing with Israelis and Palestinians and, most
important, was not led by someone who could pull out his/her cell phone
and contact the president directly when the going got rough.

Further, the president himself appears not to have appreciated the need
to enforce the key demands of the roadmap, which neither side wanted to
comply with. No effective pressure was placed on Sharon to freeze
settlement construction and remove the outposts. Nor was real pressure
placed on Abu Mazen regarding the dismantling of the terrorist
infrastructure, until it was too late. Instead, the president got caught
up in controversies over prisoner release and the fence--two non-roadmap
issues.

Here again, the lessons of past peace processes were plain to see. The
failure of all sides to insist on full compliance with the Oslo
agreements--their readiness to proceed to the next phase without
verifying adherence to early demands--is now understood to have been a
key factor in undermining mutual trust during the 1990s. Then too,
American intervention has generally succeeded only when it took place at
the highest level and over a prolonged period of time--for example, when
Secretary of State Kissinger shuttled back and forth for months on end
in 1974-5 to nail down the Israel-Egypt-Syria ceasefire and withdrawal
agreements.

In the present case, National Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice's visit
to the region in early July was instructive: neither side dared reject
her directives because they knew she spoke on behalf of the president.
But she went home the next day. By August, God was in Crawford,
Texas--not in the Middle East.

