Since 1977, Arabs and Israelis have created breakthroughs to peace
either by means of direct, secret negotiations--or not at all. This was
the case with Egypt and Israel, where direct talks in Morocco and
elsewhere led to Anwar Sadat's historic visit to Jerusalem. It was the
case with the Oslo talks that produced the historic 1993 agreement
between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization. And it
happened between Israel and Jordan in 1994. One additional, little
remembered instance was in 1983, when Israel and Lebanon negotiated a
peace treaty in direct talks. The treaty proved abortive due to weighty
geostrategic factors that Israel ignored, but the principle of direct
negotiations was valid.

After each breakthrough to peace, Israel and its Arab partner inevitably
turned to the United States for material and diplomatic support. In the
case of Israel and Egypt, both countries also recognized the need to
institutionalize an arbitration arrangement and a peacekeeping force in
Sinai.

Notably, one key reason why Syria and Israel have not made peace despite
several prolonged attempts is Damascus' consistent refusal--which
apparently reflects important political-psychological limitations--to
engage in direct, bilateral and secret talks with Israel. On the other
hand, both Israel and the PLO recognize that their conflict will only be
settled when they return to direct negotiations.

What is striking about this brief review of recent decades of
Arab-Israel peacemaking is the total absence of "Arab diplomacy".
Neither an organized body of Arab states (the Arab League) nor any
smaller coalition of Arab countries played a significant role.

Recently, however, we have witnessed two unusual developments in this
regard. One is the Saudi initiative, as approved by the Arab League in
Beirut in late March of this year. The second is the readiness of three
countries, Egypt, Jordan and Saudi Arabia, to work in an organized
capacity with the Quartet (the US, United Nations, European Union and
Russia) in trying to advance a "road map" for stabilizing the
Israeli-Palestinian scene and then moving into a broader peace process.
Despite two years of Israeli-Palestinian fighting, Egypt and Jordan have
also restricted their relationship with Israel to a far lesser extent
than many observers anticipated.

The precedents established by this new mode of Arab activity are
significant. While the Arab League version of the Saudi initiative makes
heavy territorial demands on Israel, it also avoids demanding that
Israel accept the right of return of 1948 refugees, and it offers
Israel, for the first time, Arab recognition and Arab security
guarantees. Syria, Libya, Iraq and the PLO's Farouk Qadumi--none of them
friends of the Oslo process--all voted for this measure. The Quartet's
road map embodies key elements from the Saudi initiative, along with the
notion of a firm timetable for establishing a Palestinian state.

All these elements were absent from United Nations Security Council
Resolution 242, which was drawn up in 1967 without direct Arab
participation. That Arab states and institutions are today involved in
drafting key supplementary provisions that go beyond 242 is an important
development in international diplomacy regarding the Middle East.

With or without international efforts, including Arab input, it seems
likely that little progress will be made in stabilizing the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict until the Iraq issue is resolved, probably
by a war, and until after the Israeli elections of January 28. Following
these events there will probably be a role for the new and positive
manifestation of Arab diplomacy that we have witnessed in the past year.
But it is difficult to envisage Egypt, Jordan or Saudi Arabia daring to
intervene, say, heavily in Palestinian affairs--any more than Anwar
Sadat was willing to even discuss the idea of Egypt taking back control
over the Gaza Strip within the framework of its peace treaty and
territorial arrangements with Israel. There are plain limits to Arab
involvement.

Ultimately, Israeli-Palestinian relations can only be put back on track
if one or more of the three key actors--Israel, Palestine and the
US--adopts a more realistic policy for advancing Israeli-Palestinian
peace and coexistence. When that begins to happen, the newly
constructive Arab approach, alongside the EU, can provide immense
encouragement and assistance.

Meanwhile, Israelis and Israel's supporters, however understandably
disappointed they are with the prospects for peace with the
Palestinians, have reason to be more forthcoming toward a set of
pan-Arab initiatives (recognition, security guarantees) that offer
greater incentives for peace than ever before.

