While predicting the future is a very difficult task, the looking glass
of the Middle East is not so murky. The last century has carried with it
very significant regional trends that seem to be continuing into this
new century. These trends embrace internal Arab dynamics, Arab-Israeli
relations and individual state relations with the major international
superpowers and players.

The gap between Israel and the Arabs has widened significantly on all
fronts. This gulf includes different visions of the future, contrasting
ideologies and an imbalance of power demonstrated through economic
strength, military might and other crucial components. The combination
of these inequalities and the growing gap in ideology and politics
promises the continuation and probably a deepening of the tension
between the two sides.

All along, international involvement in this conflict has been a
negative factor in aggravating relations between the two sides. In the
past, the Middle East and the Arab-Israeli conflict was negatively
affected by the Cold War. Both the United States and the Soviet Union
were competing in the Middle East by supporting and encouraging both
Israel and the Arabs. The result was the inflammation of the dispute.
More recently, we have seen how international involvement in the region,
whether in the Gulf War or in Afghanistan, has negatively impacted
Middle East differences.

The third significant trend sustained through most of the last century
has been the growing gap in the economies of the Arab world, on one
hand, and both the West and Israel, on the other. The great failure of
development projects in the Arab world and growing poverty has been
responsible for an increase in religious fundamentalism (another
negative factor that seems to be continuing with us into this new
century). The combination of increasing poverty, lagging development,
poor education and slow modernization, against a backdrop of little
political progress in solving the Palestinian-Israeli conflict has
maintained and deepened that same conflict.

Finally, the biased approach of the international community in general
and superpower USA in particular plays a significant role in elongating
this dispute. The result has been a widespread regional bitterness and
lowered confidence in the role of international legality in the Middle
East conflict. That trend, too, seems to be continuing, if not growing.

Only three sources of hope remain to mitigate these ongoing trends.
First, one cannot rule out the possibility of a leveling of the balance
of power between Israel and the Arabs of the kind that will make Israel
take Palestinian rights and concerns more seriously. That balance would
create a situation more conducive to a lasting peaceful future.

Another mitigating factor would be a more serious, responsible and
balanced intervention by the international community that might
influence regional developments towards closer alignment with the
demands of international law as the criteria and guidelines for
international intervention.

But the third and most promising source of hope comes from inside Israel
itself. The last ten years have witnessed increasing Israeli public
understanding and recognition of Palestinian rights and concerns.
Beginning in 1991, with the start of the peace process, the Israeli
public began to demonstrate an acceptance of the idea of a Palestinian
state, an end to the Israeli occupation in most of the territories and
agreement for sharing the city of Jerusalem. If that trend continues
until the Israeli people, and consequently the Israeli government,
recognize the rest of Palestinian legitimate rights (which are, by the
way, the same rights that Israelis enjoy and Palestinians have already
accepted and recognized), then the future will, indeed, be different
from the past.

Otherwise, the year 2025 is going to bring with it a continuation of the
same trends and characteristics we see now, only accompanied by a few
changes for the worse. Demographics will dramatically aggravate the
situation, but what may prove more dangerous will be advancements in
science and technology, especially information technology, making
conflicts such as the one we are living in a great deal more dangerous
and harmful.

One might say that the Middle East is now at a crossroads, with many
signs pointing to a continuation of negative trends and a snowballing of
the current hatred and regional violence. On the other hand, perhaps the
recent suffering of the two peoples will cause them enough alarm that
they minimize, if not stop altogether, the current negative trends and
give an opportunity for change.

