Q: Was the collapse of the roadmap
                                                 predestined, or avoidable?

A: The roadmap was the only option to get us out of the mess we
were in with the Palestinians. It was not implemented the way it should
have been. The Palestinians didn't do enough to deal with the
infrastructure of terrorism, and allowed Hamas and Islamic Jihad to
prepare for another round. [In this sense] the most important thing
missing in the Palestinian Authority is central command, a single
leadership that takes responsibility and earns the respect of its own
people.

Q: And on the Israeli side?

On the Israeli side there may be a problem with the [policy] position
but not with the leadership, in the sense that decisions are respected
and the government is in control. As for the position, Israel should
have decided that either we do this on our own or we get the
Palestinians to do it, knowing that they won't be immediately
successful. If you want them to do the job, then organize international
pressure on them. But once we do the job, it gives an excuse for the
extremists to carry out their attacks. [In this regard] Israeli attacks,
for example in Hebron and Nablus, were justified only if they really
prevented an immediate attack, a ticking bomb. If this was not the case
then the attacks were not justified.

Q: How would you change the Israeli approach?

A: We need to set a target of a border for Israel. If the
roadmap can do this, then Israel should stick with it, even if there are
violations here and there and we need to defend ourselves. We should
give the Palestinians the option to do the [security] job and [we
should] build the fence more quickly. If I were doing it two years ago,
the fence would be built now, and would include the main settlement
blocs near the green line that we planned to include inside Israel in
the future. This would leave room for negotiations when they come, and
provide an incentive for the Palestinians to negotiate.

Q: But the fence got in the way of the roadmap, and became
a controversial issue in and of itself.

A: It was a mistake not to do the fence earlier, but even this
difficulty could be mended in a way. It requires leadership on our part:
not to make the lives of Palestinians difficult, but to include the
settlement blocs. We should tell the United States, the European Union
and the world that this is for security, and that we are ready also to
remove the remote settlements beyond the fence. This would give us the
political room to build up a coalition of agreement.

Q: At this point in time, can the roadmap/ceasefire process
be revived?

A: There are only two options. One is to revive the roadmap and
withdraw and give the Palestinians security and political sovereignty
over large parts of the West Bank and Gaza. We don't do everything at
once, but we create a border, on the other side of which there is a
Palestinian state. This is an imperfect solution, but it relieves us of
a demographic ticking bomb.

The other option is that we do the job, defending ourselves everywhere,
including in the streets of Gaza and Nablus. This is much more dangerous
security-wise and politically. So either we do the job everywhere or
they do it in lands we withdraw from. As long as the roadmap is not
officially dead we should not bury it.

Q: Can we depend on the United States to shepherd this
process skillfully?

A: The US has its own problems now in Iraq. There has been no
problem with the US attitude here. But it depends whether the US is
ready to invest the leadership to revive the roadmap.

