Since it is impossible to cover the complexity of Arab-Palestinian
relations comprehensively in such a short space, I will focus mainly on
relations since the outbreak of the Intifada on September 28, 2000.

From the beginning, Arab states held emergency sessions and regular
meetings of heads of state and foreign ministers in order to monitor the
crisis between the Palestinians and Israeli occupation forces. Egypt
sponsored an emergency summit, then a conference at Sharm El Sheikh,
inviting the belligerent parties and United States President Bill
Clinton to try and find a way out of the conflict. Then came a joint
Egyptian-Jordanian initiative, followed by another Arab summit at which
the Arab states pledged almost a billion US dollars in aid to the
Palestinian Authority. This enabled the Authority to survive at a time
when Israel was reoccupying territory, confiscating financial resources
and demolishing the infrastructure.

The Arab public, too, was stirred to action, calling on everyone to
offer support and donating what they could in aid of their Palestinian
brethren.

It was an expression of the depth and interconnectedness of
Arab-Palestinian relations and demonstrated the centrality of the
Palestinian issue in the hearts and minds of the Arab people.

The Arab initiative demonstrated the maturity reached in Arab political
thought. Saudi Crown Prince Abdullah Ben Abdulaziz launched a courageous
initiative at the beginning of 2002, offering a comprehensive political
program of peace, in which he responded to many questions that were on
the minds of Israelis and Westerners on the one hand, and the Arab
people on the other.

The Arab peace initiative was the result of difficult debate and was
undoubtedly the best thing that had happened to Israel since 1948. The
initiative was carefully worded, each letter studied in order to answer
Israelis' questions regarding their future, their fears, dreams and
aspirations. It addressed, in particular, the Arabs' view of Israel and
of a final solution, including a flexible approach to the refugee
problem. Consultations with the Israeli peace camp were ongoing, in
order to judge how the initiative might help convince the Israeli public
of the Arab people's serious desire to deal with Israel as a partner in
the region. The initiative also took into account the suffering of the
Palestinian people, as well as their dreams and legitimate national
aspirations, and those of the Arab world.

Unfortunately, the opportunity was wasted, as both the United States and
Israel callously disregarded what could have been a comprehensive
framework for ending the Arab-Israeli conflict.

This illogical, inexplicable disregard of the proposal did not sway Arab
leaders, who continued--under Egyptian, Saudi and Jordanian
leadership--to support the Palestinians as much as possible and to seek
rational ways for ending the vicious cycle of violence, and the unjust
and arrogant occupation. This was in spite of serious attempts to
exclude them from playing any role, including a role in the Quartet
headed by the United States. The Arabs, however, managed to impose their
presence and convince the parties of the importance of their participation.

The Arab states need to continue supporting the Palestinians, who still
consider peace their strategic option, and negotiations the only path to
a peaceful settlement. They also need to strengthen diplomatic efforts
aimed at finding effective solutions to the ongoing conflict.

