Secretary of State Colin Powell's speech marked a significant
development in the official American understanding of the ongoing
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. For the first time, a high-level American
official placed the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories at
the core of the US understanding of the ongoing conflict. This is even
more important in light of the previous US adoption of Israeli attempts
to consider the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and the Gaza Strip,
disputed territories to be compromised - not occupied territories to be
freed.

The other significant aspect in the same speech was its concentration on
international law, in particularly Security Council Resolution 242, as
the basis for a solution and the criteria for judging the different
positions. This is again important because Israel has succeeded in
moving deliberations in American-sponsored negotiations far away from
international legality.

One of the main objectives of this ongoing Palestinian uprising or
Intifada is to remind the world that the essence of this conflict is the
illegal Israeli occupation. The clear regional message coming from
internal Palestinian debates over "the rhetoric of the Intifada" is that
this is a legitimate struggle against illegitimate occupation and that
negotiations should be over a complete end to the occupation, i.e.
implementation of Security Council Resolution 242 and working out the
practicalities of a final and normal peace between Israel and
Palestinians. What has made that rhetoric very popular in Palestine and
elsewhere was the peace process' deviation over the last ten years from
its main terms of reference, particularly the exchange of land for
peace. The deviation gave Israel the opportunity to consolidate the
occupation by expanding settlements, instead of ending the occupation
entirely.

It is equally important that Powell developed the official American
rhetoric towards the illegal Israeli expansion of Jewish settlements in
the occupied territories. He not only hinted at the harm that this does
to the peace process' credibility, but also reiterated what Palestinians
have been repeating - that the settlement policy "prejudges" the peace
process. This is especially important because the official American
position on Israeli settlement has changed in recent years to consider
it "harmful," not "illegal."

Despite these positive aspects, two significant problems remain. The
speech lacked any mechanism of implementation, which is why it is not
expected to result in anything much. Powell called for activating work
on the Mitchell recommendations and Tenet ideas. But neither of these
has previously succeeded, largely due to US adoption of the Israeli
interpretation of both.

Previous experience has shown that the problem lies not in the amount of
American attention to the conflict, but in the nature of this attention.
The obstacle for progress is the Israeli refusal to abide by the terms
of reference of the peace process, in particularly the relevant
international law that Powell reiterated in his speech. For that reason,
the road to progress is an American investment in effort, and perhaps
guarantees, toward bridging the gap between Israeli negotiating
positions and the requirements of international law.

Powell also disappointed most Palestinians when he completely adopted
the Israeli description of current confrontations on the ground. He
strongly attacked the Palestinian Intifada and the Palestinian
president's role in this regard, holding President Yasser Arafat
accountable for stopping the resistance. This, of course, contradicts
Powell's statements about the nature of the conflict, the continuing
Israeli occupation and the affects of closure and settlement expansion,
all of which are legitimate reasons to resist.

While the two sides are looking forward to the visit of US envoys
Anthony Zinni and William Burns, Palestinians feel that the ball lies in
the American court. How do the Americans propose that we move from the
current situation to the end results Powell described in his speech?

Now that President Arafat has finally succeeded in implementing his
ceasefire, Israel has (not coincidentally) engaged in an unprecedented
security escalation. That escalation, including the random killing of
five children and at least one woman, as well as stepped-up
assassinations and a tightening of the closure, all seem aimed at making
Arafat's task of maintaining a ceasefire impossible. The main question
facing us now is what the American envoys will do about this Israeli
escalation, one very similar to Israel's previous heightened attacks
that commence with any successful reduction in violent
confrontation.

