Violence in its various forms was and remains the principal permanent
characteristic of the conflict between Jews and Arabs in the Land of
Israel/Palestine since the conflict began in the late 19th century. More
precisely, violence was the most prominent attribute of the Arab
reaction to the political, material and cultural challenge presented by
the Zionist enterprise.

The violence employed by individuals and groups of Palestinian Arabs
against the Jewish settlers was a response to a sense of threat
projected by an immigrant society that was culturally foreign and
possessed an advanced organizational, economic and technological
capability. Moreover, the Zionist enterprise had the goal of turning the
entire country into a Jewish state, with the threat--that over the years
appeared to be a self-fulfilling prophecy--to dislodge the Arabs from
their material and spiritual assets.

Arab violence toward Jews generally involved sporadic, temporary and
uncontrolled popular uprisings, alongside a routine of murders carried
out by individuals acting on their own. Together they evolved into a
mode of violent activity devoid of any distinction between target
categories and directed at civilians. A considerable portion of the more
extended violent Palestinian Arab outbreaks also involved internal
bloodletting; this derived from traditional societal tensions that even
the struggle against the Zionist enemy could not stop.

In the Palestinian collective memory, the extended violence directed
against the Jews became a legitimate weapon within the context of a just
struggle to protect the basic rights of individuals and of a people. The
violent conflict to defend Palestine and its Arab nature against the
Zionist invaders, whether defined religiously as a "jihad" or in a
national-secular sense as armed popular struggle, took on a peremptory
moral significance that shaped the consciousness of generation upon
generation within Palestinian society. Thus Sheikh Ez a-Din al-Qassam,
who pioneered the fulfillment of jihad as an obligation for all Muslims,
became both symbol and paragon for the secular and religious Palestinian
resistance movements alike, as they raised the banner of total and
uncompromising struggle against Israel.

Violence and terrorism were always presented by Palestinians as the
weapon of the weak and as a response to aggression by foreign invaders
who were supported by international forces. In the absence of the
capacity to directly confront Israeli security forces, the strategy of
armed struggle that was selected featured political and propaganda
objectives that bore unmistakable characteristics of terrorism against
innocent civilians--who were defined as part of the "Zionist military
entity."

The Palestinian national movement has adhered to a violent mode of
action since the mandatory period, despite the failures and disasters
that have befallen it. At the receiving end, violent outbreaks by
Palestinians honed the existential fears of the Zionist founding fathers
and drove them to develop, in any way possible, the political,
organizational and military capacities of the /Yishuv/ (the pre-state
Jewish community in Palestine) and then the State of Israel, in
anticipation of an all-out and decisive confrontation. Indeed,
non-discriminate Arab violence helped develop and rationalize the power
components of Zionism, and to base them on the moral ethos of "defense",
"purity of arms" and the ultimate necessity of the use of force.

Palestinian Arab violence against Jews and Israelis usually featured an
unbridgeable gap between goals and means that inevitably led to
self-destruction. With the exception of the 1929 riots, when the Yishuv
was in real danger, Arab violence and terrorism were not able to strike
a mortal blow at the Zionist enterprise. Nor, with the exception of the
invasion by Arab standing armies in 1948, did the State of Israel ever
confront an existential threat by an Arab military coalition. But in
historical perspective, the violence invoked by generations of
Palestinian Arabs emerges as a disaster for their own national
interests. Even when, in the short term, it appeared that violence had
yielded political fruit, such as the 1939 White Paper or the opening of
a dialogue between the United States and the Palestine Liberation
Organization in 1988 during the first Intifada, in the longer term the
Palestinian national leadership failed the historic test of
distinguishing between vision and reality, and repeatedly missed the
opportunity to achieve part of its objectives.

Nor did the Oslo process bring Palestinian society to recognize the need
to abandon violence and turn to peacemaking, if only in accordance with
a calculation of costs and benefits. Despite bitter historical
experience, the Palestinian leadership continued to rely on the support
of the Arab and Muslim world in its struggle with Israel, and to
anticipate its assistance in internationalizing the conflict. True, the
culmination of the Oslo process bitterly disappointed most of those
Palestinians who supported it from the start. But in the final analysis
the al-Aqsa Intifada will probably not be remembered by many
Palestinians as their greatest hour, and particularly not as the
greatest hour of the Palestinian Authority headed by Yasir Arafat. The
latter was supposed to serve as a responsible national leadership, but
instead acted as a service provider to local entrepreneurs of violence
and terrorism, and adhered to unrealistic sacred ideals rather than
trying to change them.

Palestinian violence and terrorism, which in the current Intifada
reached new heights in terms of frequency of attacks and the scope of
murder of Israelis, are more disastrous than ever, first of all for
Palestinians themselves. Given the extent of loss of life caused both to
them and to Israel, the economic and institutional destruction they have
brought upon themselves, to say nothing of the damage to Israeli public
trust in any sort of agreement with them and the Israeli public's
inclination to rally round right wing forces--it remains only to
contemplate how far along the Palestinians could have been today in
their drive to realize their goals if, prior to and during the first
Intifada, they had adopted a strategy of civil disobedience and
non-violence from the school of thought championed by Gandhi and his
Palestinian disciple, Mubarak Awad.

