Very few people believe that the "vision" of United States President
George W. Bush will be realized through the declared roadmap
                       . This is not only because there are many
formidable and powerful enemies of peace in all camps, and not only
because both publics are in a serious state of mistrust and despair.
Indeed, the roadmap has an inherent structural problem because it is
missing the primary principles that should guide it and does not spell
out the details of the end game.

People on both sides are traumatized by terror and violence and confused
and bewildered by the political haggling. Nobody knows what shape or
borders or viability the Palestinian state will have. No one knows if
there will be refugees returning. And no one knows the fate of Jerusalem.

In order for peace to set sail there should be some guiding principles.
The most important is equality. This is not to say that the conflict is
between two equals. Overwhelming Israeli power and unconditional United
States support have no comparison on the Palestinian side, other than
the tragic balance of terror that has been reached with Israel through
suicide bombing. But neither side should be treated differently from the
other. This principle should be applied in all issues, although
Palestinians may willingly surrender their right to have a military
because they understand that Israelis are obsessed with the fear that
Palestinians will use the arms to take back the Palestinian villages and
towns that are now part of Israel.

It is a matter of principle that Palestinian fighters be granted
recognition and immunity from prosecution in Israel. They believed they
were fighting for their country and people. Both sides' soldiers should
be forgiven and permitted to reenter life as normally as possible, while
allowing room for internal prosecution of ranking officers who ordered
crimes against humanity.

Israel will recognize the Palestinian right to return and Palestinians
will accept the Jews' right of return. If Jews are allowed to return
after 3,000 years, it is only natural that Palestinians have the right
of return after less than six decades. In this respect, no nation, group
or individual can claim the privilege of being "chosen". I am, like
every other human being, as chosen as any--and no better than any.

The other principle that both sides must accept is that violence will
only bring violence, that persecuted Jews have in their own way
persecuted Palestinians who in their own way persecuted themselves and
others. Both communities today suffer an endemic state of violence.
During the relatively quiet seven years of Palestinian Authority
governance, violence within Palestinian society rose by 300 percent
every year. Israel has seen a sharp increase in all forms of violence
and today the Israeli army has one of the highest rates of suicide in
the world.

For this reason, the roadmap should include provisions for internal as
much as cross-border reconciliation. Peace means creating a way of life,
not only scripting a treaty between two politicians. Both Israeli and
Palestinian societies must undergo a process of national reconciliation.
Palestinians will have to experience a process of grieving for lost
land, home and loved ones. This period should also include a process for
granting forgiveness and clemency to collaborators with Israel, allowing
them to reenter life as usual.

Too, Israel will have to undergo a process of acknowledging its
responsibility and apologizing for the hurt caused Palestinians, while
taking responsibility for Palestinian compensation. Israel must accept
world condemnation of its occupation of the West Bank and Gaza as the
root of evil. Indeed many Jews have warned against the serious
detrimental and demoralizing effects of oppressing another nation and
subjugating millions of people who simply want their freedom and rights.
Such a brutal and long-standing occupation has produced an inhumane
environment for Palestinians, with horrifying results.

The most tragic development of the current Intifada is the invention and
use of suicide bombing on a horrific scale. Resulting from the
Palestinians' failure to win over the Israelis, suicide bombing is the
ultimate expression of despair, promising not freedom but revenge.
Naturally such operations of "terror" have added to the arsenal of
Zionist propaganda that states that Israel is the only and ultimate
victim, aiding further in the repression of Jewish guilt. It is not
surprising that Israel's propaganda machine has managed to link
Palestinian suicide bombing to international terror. Suicide bombing and
the killing of civilians inside Israel is all that is needed to convince
the world that Jews continue to be slaughtered as victims of racial and
religious hatred and of the barbarism of "those Arabs."

As part of any peace agreement, Palestinians must accept that murdering
innocent children and women in buses and restaurants in Tel Aviv and
Jerusalem is a crime, one that should be made prosecutable by law. While
suicide bombing is understandably a brutal form of revenge for the
inhumane condition of occupation, this should not justify terror. It is
tragic that suicide bombing of civilians has undermined Islam's message
and the Palestinian demand for freedom.

If peace is a way of life then resistance through peaceful means should
be the Palestinian method of struggle for liberation. A peaceful
resistance would liberate not only Palestine and Palestinians, but also
Israel and Israelis. Peaceful resistance will allow Israelis the chance
to look inward, release their repressed guilt and accept responsibility.
Violence will only force them to look outside for an enemy. And when
Israelis apologize for the crimes committed against Palestinians, it
will help both.

For the Palestinians, this will be their opportunity to feel dignified
by responding with the honorable, "Yes, we accept your apology and we
accept you." On the other hand, apology will help Israelis to feel
whole, rehabilitating their injured selves from their grief and loss and
repressed guilt.

