Q: How has the issue of corruption shaped the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict?

A: In fact, it has shaped not the conflict, but our
conception of "peace". From the beginning, when Palestinians and
Israelis crafted the Oslo agreement and commenced its implementation,
the Israelis (with the Americans behind them) opened private accounts in
Israeli banks in the name of [Palestinian President Yasser] Arafat, to
which all the taxes collected by Israel on behalf of the Palestinian
Authority were diverted. This was the source of all our troubles
concerning corruption.

Q: Why has that damaged Palestinian fiscal management?

A: The Israelis thought that if Arafat was encouraged to be
corrupt and to be satisfied with the money that he received [that way],
he might offer the Israelis more compromises and, therefore, acquiesce
to their demands.

Q: Why do Palestinians make direct links between fiscal
corruption and political corruption, or the abandonment of the
Palestinian cause?

A: The Israelis were really helping the Palestinian
Authority to be corrupt by allowing for these private banking accounts.
The whole aim was to seduce the Palestinian Authority into corruption.
When you are a corrupt person who is also a decision maker, you are
always distracted by where you can steal money, how you can hide the
theft, where you can go with it--I think that any patriot or responsible
leader at any level will experience damaged efficacy and some negative
ramifications just by virtue of an agenda that differs from his work.

Q: There has been a great internal focus on corruption
since then. Do you think that matters have improved?

A: Yes, to a certain extent. I think that [Palestinian
Minister of Finance] Salam Fayyad has tackled the basics of reform in
the financial sector, but he has not yet completed this task
satisfactorily. For example, concerning the investments of the
Palestinian Authority, he [Fayyad] has gained control of some, but we as
the Palestinian Legislative Council have not yet received the complete
report of all of the companies and various investments of the
Palestinian Authority, whether international or public. He promised when
he presented the budget of 2003 that he would have this information for
us 15 days after we were to give our vote of confidence in the budget.
Now one year has passed.

Q: How much does international pressure play into the
process of reform?

A: They set in motion the reforms, but I think that there is
a resistance to true reform on the part of some who are interested in
avoiding a disruption of their practices. There is a resistance to
making these reforms comprehensive and total. Because of that, the
problem lies with the decision makers in the Palestinian Authority.

Q: Does it help when the United States or the European
Union put pressure on the Palestinian Authority?

A: Not the way the Americans are doing it. When you want
someone to tell you "no" then you can ask him or her in a manner that
will ensure a negative response. They are bragging about it; they are
talking it up. Especially Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. In
reality, this [approach] damages Palestinians more than it benefits or
encourages them. Both sides could make better use of diplomatic
procedures and processes, rather than this vulgar way of acting.

Q: What do you think that the possible indictment of Ariel
Sharon would do for the issue of corruption?

A: This will help a great deal, really.

