Corruption appears to be far worse in Palestine than in Israel. In
Palestine, large-scale corruption was imported along with Palestinian
leader Yasser Arafat in 1994, i.e., with the attempt by both parties to
resolve the Palestinian issue, and it has flourished under conditions of
both political progress and outright conflict. In Israel, the occupation
has spawned corruption.

To be fair, power corrupts whether in Israel, Palestine or anywhere
else. But our two societies are in worse shape than most, and we must
ask why.

One factor both societies have in common is violence. In Israel, the
violence inevitably spawned by the occupation has crept into all walks
of society, where it in turn nurtures organized crime. In Palestine, the
decision more than three years ago to rely on violence as a means of
furthering the Palestinian cause against Israel has generated Israeli
counter-violence which has weakened Palestinian societal institutions
like the police.

Yasser Arafat's regime also appears to have encouraged or tolerated, to
various degrees, forms of anarchy throughout the West Bank and Gaza
Strip. The result, at least in some areas, is rule by gangs and
warlords; in others, it is at times rule by no one. Even before that,
with the advent of the Oslo process, Israel mistakenly indicated to
Arafat that it would tolerate compromises in the rule of law in the
Palestinian Authority if that was the price to be paid for Palestinians
delivering security to Israel. In other words, we knew we were importing
corruption. We ended up with neither rule of law in Palestine nor
security in Israel.

Israel retains its societal mechanisms for fighting corruption: the
police, the attorney general, the ministry of justice, an admirable
court system, and a free press. In an atmosphere of conflict, suicide
bombings, and violence imported from the occupation, they labor under
extremely trying circumstances. The current discussion--in public and
among law-enforcement officials--regarding the possible indictment of
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is a sign that the system still works. What
is missing--at least until some sort of modus vivendi is found with the
Palestinians--is a vastly reinforced police force that is equipped to
deal simultaneously with every crime from sex slavery and family and
school violence to extortion and white collar violations.

This is doable, if courageous decisions are made to exploit the current
dramatic reduction in conventional military threats against Israel and
reduce yet further the military budget. This requires a recognition at
the highest level--where unfortunately some of the corruption
resides--that crime and corruption are themselves a danger to the
country's security, and that more resources, both qualitative and
quantitative, must be devoted to internal law and order.

Obviously, one way to reduce part of the corruption on both sides is to
end the occupation. The only way to do this today appears to be through
unilateral steps. These may not end the violence, but they will
certainly reduce the more damaging aspects of negative interaction
between the two societies. As for the corruption that appears to be
endemic to Arafat's regime, the efforts of a single just man, Minister
of Finance Salam Fayyad, have been salutary at the governmental level.
But they apparently cannot touch Arafat himself, not to mention those
anarchic areas of Palestinian life where government has ceased to function.

The Islamists, led by Hamas, whose popularity and influence are growing,
have their own solutions to problems of corruption. But if they take
power, not only will Palestinian society pay a heavy price in
restriction of democracy and individual freedoms. Israel will find it
difficult to coexist under any circumstances with a Palestinian Islamist
neighbor.

