Violence has been one of the most prominent characteristics of the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict, one used deliberately by both sides in
order to achieve their separate political objectives. In the history of
the conflict, various periods have been marked by first intensification,
and then a reduction, in the use of force. But for most years of the
conflict, from the beginning of the waves of Zionist immigration to
Palestine to the subsequent attempts to take over land and property from
the indigenous Palestinian population that persist even today, violence
has been a major feature of this struggle.

We have recently reached the point where many (and perhaps even most)
Israelis and Palestinians labor equally under the illusion that the
other side understands the language of force over any other means of
communication. This is despite historical evidence to the contrary,
which shows that violence has never produced political results for
either Israelis or Palestinians. Palestinians, who are legitimately
trying to achieve the end of Israel's occupation and their own freedom,
self-determination, statehood and refugee right of return, have not made
significant progress towards any of these goals through forceful means,
while they have made progress--no matter how incremental--via peaceful
means. The most prominent examples of Palestinian successes are Israel's
recognition of the Palestine Liberation Organization as the legitimate
Palestinian leadership, as well as Israel's partial and gradual
withdrawal from Palestinian land as it simultaneously allowed the PLO to
take charge. All of these achievements occurred during and as a result
of the peace process, which began at the Madrid conference and
culminated in the signing of the Oslo agreement, however flawed it was.

Israelis, on the other hand, who have been trying to achieve the
legitimate goals of peace, security, recognition and regional
integration, have not moved one step towards realizing those goals via
their own use of violence. On the contrary, periods of intensified
Israeli force, such as that which commenced on September 29, 2000, have
brought Israelis only less peace, security, recognition and integration
and resulted in this protracted vengeful confrontation.

It was during the periods that Israel used a peaceful negotiated
approach that circumstances have changed--no matter how slowly--in favor
of the objectives of the average Israeli citizen. The years of 1997-2000
were the most peaceful and secure four years for Israelis in the history
of the Israeli occupation of the Palestinian territories. Those years
witnessed remarkable breakthroughs in Israeli-Arab relations, mutual
recognition, cooperation and integration. It was not by coincidence that
prominent Israeli journalist Danny Rubinstein noted in the tense weeks
preceding the outbreak of the September 2000 violence that the last
Palestinian attack on Israelis had occurred four years prior.

Both sides have now reached a climax in the use of force and
subsequently each side is insisting that the other stop first. The only
way out of this circuitous logic is the implementation of a schedule of
steps that will be acted out simultaneously by both sides, i.e., a
coordinated fulfillment of the obligations of the roadmap
                       . Together and at the same time, each side must
make a declaration recognizing the basic rights of the other and
committing to a moratorium on the use of force. Then, also
simultaneously, both sides must actually stop their acts of violence,
not excluding the quiet violence of Israeli attempts to confiscate land,
demolish houses and prevent by force the movement of Palestinian
citizens and local commodities. Otherwise, we have learned through an
excess of experience that the wielding of force will only produce a like
reaction.

