Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon does not hide his intentions. First
he thought that Israel could hold onto the territories for many more
years, and that the demographic problem that would emerge when
Palestinians become the majority of the inhabitants east of the Jordan
River would be solved by sending them to Jordan ("Jordan is Palestine")
or by means of mass immigration on the part of western Jewry. In the
course of three years of rule he understood that there is no chance to
turn Jordan into Palestine, and that immigration to Israel declines when
the security and economic situation is bad.

He concluded that what could not be solved by force would be solved by
more force; his policy of force against the Palestinians was not
accompanied by any proposal for a political process. Even the
Palestinian prime ministers, who to a large extent were appointed as a
consequence of his pressure, were never accepted by him as negotiating
partners.

According to Sharon's own testimony, in an interview last week with
William Safire of /The New York Times/, into this political vacuum there
entered undesirable proposals like the Geneva accord, moving him to
present his own plan. He took it from his private archive: a plan from
the early 1980s that already bore his name, the thrust of which was to
establish bantustan-like Palestinian enclaves in the occupied
territories that would enable Israel to rule the land without bearing
the Palestinian demographic burden. Sharon is prepared to implement such
a plan with a willing Palestinian leader. Twenty years ago he tried to
establish the "village leagues" and to appoint Mustafa Dudin as their
head to negotiate with him. The experiment failed, of course, and Sharon
is still searching for a congenial Palestinian leader. Not having found
one, he now prefers to implement his plan unilaterally.

Sharon views his plan as a ringing slap in the face to the Palestinians.
He lives in a zero-sum world in which everything good for Israel is bad
for the Palestinians, and vice versa. This is also how he sees US
President Bush's letter to him--as his victory and their loss--and how
he gloats over it for the benefit of members of his party whose support
he seeks in the May 2 Likud referendum.

The Arab world has played right into his hands. Rather than their noting
that what was stated by Bush to Sharon was already proposed to both
sides by President Clinton in December 2000 (settlement blocs,
non-return to the green line, solving the refugee problem in the
Palestinian state, and even a clear statement that acknowledges that
Israel cannot accept the principle of the "right of return" in the sense
of return by refugees to sovereign Israel), the letter was understood
precisely as Sharon wanted it to be: as punishment for the Palestinians.
Egyptian President Mubarak, who had met with Bush a few days earlier,
reacted with great displeasure; Jordan's King Abdullah refused to see
Bush, and returned to Jordan from the US west coast without stopping in
Washington; while the Palestinian leadership declared that this was the
end of the peace process.

The truth is that the Bush letter restores the final status settlement
to the Israeli national agenda. Sharon sought to determine that the
roadmap was dead. Bush recommitted himself to the roadmap and to his own
vision. All the achievements that Sharon takes pride in are linked to
final status. No serious observer believes that final status will be
based on anything but two states for two peoples, a new and agreed
border, and a solution under which refugees will not return to Israel.
What at first glance appears to be Bush's acceptance of Sharon's diktat,
is in fact a reformulation of the Clinton plan or the Geneva accord.

What looks to Sharon like an interim agreement that never turns into a
final status accord--since as long as he's setting the agenda Israel
will never have a suitable partner--should now become the first phase in
a process that very quickly leads to a permanent agreement. The more
time this takes, the worse the situation will be: from Israel's
standpoint the demographic balance will change for the worse; from the
Palestinian standpoint the settlements will expand and become yet more
of a fait accompli. The position of Palestinian pragmatists will be
weakened, insofar as they are incapable of providing services and
security to their public.

Those Israelis and Palestinians who believe in an agreement rather than
unilateral moves, along with those in the world who appreciate how the
end of the Middle East conflict will contribute to global stability,
should make every effort to ensure that the departure from Gaza
leverages an ongoing peace process. There is a good chance for success,
given that principles such as the non-removability of settlements are
likely to be violated in the initial stage by the father of the
settlements himself.

