Any discussion of the role and ramifications of violence in the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict is seriously hampered by the two sides'
inability to agree on the meaning of violence--much less the ramifications.

This has not been an issue in Israel's other conflicts. Israel has
fought wars with Egypt and Syria, with both sides declaratively
accepting the need to observe the international rules of war with regard
to civilians, POWs, banned ammunition, etc. If there were violations of
the "rules of violence"--and there were, on both sides--the two parties
were able to deal with them in the context of their bilateral
relationship. Thus the legacy of violence has not played a significant
role in Israel's efforts to make peace with Egypt, which succeeded, and
with Syria, which failed.

This is not the case in the Israeli-Palestinian relationship, where
violence appears to be a more central factor. First, because we can't
agree on the meaning of the term. Many Palestinians and supporters of
the Palestinian cause define violence as anything that derives from the
occupation. According to this approach, the settlements are violence,
deportations are violence--indeed, any Israeli act of occupation is
violence--and the violence embodied in all such acts is equally severe.

Israelis, this writer included, generally disagree: the occupation is
bad and many of the settlements reflect a terrible mistake in Israeli
strategic thinking. They are an abuse of power. But to term any abuse of
power "violence" befuddles the issue. The term "violence" should be
confined to the meaning of rough or injurious physical force. Wherever
possible, abuses of power should be dealt with politically rather than
with a violent response. The record shows that at a number of junctures
in recent decades the Palestinians could have achieved statehood on far
better terms than they can contemplate today, had they renounced
violence and accepted or adhered to a political process: for example in
1947-48, 1978 (Camp David I) and 2000 (Camp David II). By and large
violence has hurt, not helped, the Palestinian cause.

This brings us to the second reason why violence is now so central to
our conflict. Most Palestinians apparently refuse to distinguish between
the violence of suicide bombings and other attacks carried out by
Palestinian civilians that deliberately target Israeli civilians, and
the violence of Israeli military responses that target Palestinian
perpetrators of violence and all too frequently inadvertently injure
innocent Palestinian civilians, or even the violence attributed to acts
of occupation. In those instances where Palestinians agree that Israeli
civilians should not be targeted, they generally refuse to view Israeli
settlers, including women, children and the aged (who do not bear arms)
as civilians. Moreover, many of those Palestinians who criticize the use
of violence against Israeli civilians express their reservations at the
level of utility--costs and benefits--rather than morality.

Israelis not only insist upon these moral distinctions, but since the
events of 9/11 in New York we are in good company: the issue of the
right to deliberately target civilians with violence is today on the
cutting edge of a clash of civilizations between the Islamic radical
movements and their supporters on the one hand, and Israel, the United
States and much of the rest of the world, on the other. One additional
key aspect of this clash touches on the readiness to do violence to
oneself, i.e., to commit suicide, in order to injure enemy civilians.
Here we appear to be confronting significant differences in current
religious and cultural attitudes toward life and death between Judaism
and Christianity on the one hand, and some adherents of Islam, on the
other.

Meanwhile, the violence of the conflict is having a disastrous effect
within our respective societies. As Palestinian psychiatrist Eyad El
Sarraj notes in the current Palestine-Israel Journal, "it is a proven
fact that abused people will turn to abuse others." This is something
neither side wants or needs.

Because we cannot agree on the definition of violence relative to our
conflict, we cannot productively discuss many of its ramifications. This
is a major impediment to the restoration of mutual confidence and of a
shared capacity to communicate between the two sides. Still, even if the
two sides can agree on a partial suspension of violence--though they
apparently cannot do so on the basis of shared values and motives--this
could be a step forward. This is where we currently stand with the
efforts to implement the roadmap                        .

