Everything we can learn from the experience of the past 55 years teaches
us that when Israelis feel secure Israel prospers economically and
socially. Conversely, when Israelis feel threatened, the country's
primary economic indicators decline. Security means confidence--investor
and consumer confidence, whether domestic or foreign.

A sense of security can come from one of two sources: military
dominance, and a peace process. After 1967, for example, there was no
peace process, but Israel radiated self-confidence due to its military
achievements, and if there were security problems they seemed to be
confined to distant locations like the Suez Canal. The response was an
economic boom. After 1991, on the other hand, the emergence of the
Madrid and then the Oslo processes generated a wave of economic growth
based on expanding trade possibilities (China, India, Arab countries)
and the influx of large overseas investments in Israeli hi-tech.

Skeptics will of course point out that the post-'67 sense of security
was false--witness the 1973 war--and that peace never warmed to the
extent that Israel could appreciably expand trade with its Arab
neighbors. But this merely emphasizes the point that it is the
impression of security, and not necessarily security itself, that
generates both investor confidence and a popular sense of buoyancy.

Socioeconomic developments of recent years have, if anything,
exaggerated the price we pay for a decrease in security and confidence.
The defects and distortions that we have built into our domestic system,
such as huge governmental welfare expenses to bridge a large income gap;
the existence of an entire sector, the ultra-Orthodox, that consumes
national resources without contributing to the economy; disproportionate
investments in the settlement infrastructure in the West Bank and Gaza;
and the presence of foreign guest-workers in numbers equivalent to the
number of our unemployed--all these burdens are relatively invisible as
long as the economy grows at a satisfactory pace. But they become
unbearable when no growth or negative growth is registered. The global
economic downturn has of course not helped matters, but our situation is
far worse that that of similar economies and the only explanation is the
widespread perception of lack of security.

What appears to be worse about the economic decline of the past two and
half years, compared to the more distant past, is the parallel societal
malaise brought on primarily by the collapse of the peace process and
the Palestinian suicide bombing offensive and its normative costs. We
are paying a frightening price in terms of erosion of the rule of law
and the independent national media, a decline in educational standards,
corruption, and growing domestic and youth violence and societal
reliance on elements of brute force rather than dialogue. Perhaps most
frightening of all is the frenzied pace of violent and negative events,
which leaves us numb and increasingly indifferent to the real choices we
can still make, in the January 28 elections for example.

Can anything positive be said to have emerged from the past 28 months of
Israeli-Palestinian warfare? Certainly, relative to what many
Palestinians and others expected to happen to Israeli society, we have
developed and displayed an impressive degree of cohesion and resilience.
A movement to avoid or condemn military service never really took off.
Trendy intellectual "post-Zionist" schools of thought that questioned
Israel's status as a Jewish state have been discredited. And a
comparison to the restrictions placed on civil freedoms in the United
States after 9/11, under a security threat that pales compared to our
situation, puts Israel's behavior regarding human rights issues into
perspective.

Then too, the Palestinian socioeconomic situation under Israeli attack
and reoccupation is far, far worse. (This article deliberately abstains
from discussing the reasons for the conflict itself.) But Palestinians
have also displayed impressive societal resilience. In Israeli eyes, the
Palestinian capacity to fall back on a less developed economy and a
culture revolving around the extended family has in some ways generated
greater cohesion than in Israel.

Under these circumstances, and in view of the absence of even a hint of
a peace process, the only initiative that could conceivably create a
sense of enhanced security and begin to turn the situation around is
"separation": building a fence near the Green Line and dismantling the
isolated settlements beyond it and in the Gaza Strip, thereby radically
reducing the threat of suicide bombings that has had such a devastating
socioeconomic effect, and setting Israel back on the right path
demographically to remain a Jewish state. A serious effort in this
direction would also represent a far more positive and constructive
injection of public money than settlement bypass roads and defenses. And
it might provide the encouragement Palestinians need to organize their
own unilateral ceasefire and begin reconstruction.

Hopefully this will be the key issue on the agenda of the political
opposition after Israel's elections.

