In looking for the immediate causes of the present conflict between
Israel and the Palestinians, we might point to the failure of the Camp
David talks. This was to a large degree the responsibility of Israel,
specifically Ehud Barak, primarily because of his insistence upon
forcing a summit for which the Palestinians had clearly declared
themselves both opposed and unprepared. However well-intended and
far-reaching the proposals offered by Barak (and they were indeed
well-intended and far-reaching in my opinion), they fell significantly
short of the Palestinian need for full sovereignty over the contiguous
territory of the West Bank (and Gaza).

What followed the disappointment of Camp David was the ill-advised visit
to the Temple Mount by Ariel Sharon that triggered the Aqsa intifada.
(Ironically, it was also an incident at the Western Wall that triggered
the bloody clashes between Palestinians and Jews in 1929.)

While the Camp David failure was a contributing factor to the outburst
of Palestinian violence at the end of September 2000, and the Sharon
incident acted as a trigger, the underlying reasons were connected with
the deep disillusionment and disappointment with the Oslo process and
the collapse of the peace process in the years if not months following
the assassination of Yitzhak Rabin.

The peace process might have survived if Israel had not assassinated the
"engineer" Yihya Ayash or if Arafat had cracked down on Hamas and
Islamic Jihad, thereby preventing the terrorist attacks of early 1996.
Similarly, the peace process might have weathered the terrorist attacks
of early 1996 if Rabin, the authoritative security figure for Israelis,
had lived. Shimon Peres did not have such authority; the result was the
election of Netanyahu and the virtual suspension of the peace process.

Yet more fundamentally, the Oslo accords, including the Wye Agreements,
had not been sufficiently implemented--both sides had failed to live up
to their commitments. The situation for Israelis did actually improve
enormously as a result of Oslo: note the doubling of countries with
which Israel held diplomatic relations; tourism to and even from various
Arab countries; an economic boom from investment, tourism growth and
some regional cooperation, and more. For the Palestinians, however, the
situation on the ground actually deteriorated: ironically, as Israel
withdrew from some areas, many more roadblocks and checkpoints were
created, East Jerusalem was virtually closed off and, still more
ominously, more land was lost to settlement expansion as Israel appeared
to be entrenching itself more rather than less solidly into many parts
of the occupied territories. These are the factors that led to
Palestinian disappointment with the peace process.

It was most likely this deep popular disillusionment, coupled possibly
with political considerations that a show of force might produce greater
flexibility on Israel's part that led to the launching of the intifada.
It may have been the case, as some have contended, that the riots of
late September and early October 2000 were planned to be basically
popular and relatively short, much like the Palestinian response to the
opening of the Hasmonean tunnel in 1996, rather than a full-scale return
to "armed struggle." It may have been the case that the Palestinian
leadership or those pressing for the intifada did not anticipate the
strong Israeli military response. Whatever the intentions or the
expectations, however, it was this intifada, or perhaps the failure to
call it to a halt while such a move was still possible, that led to the
destructive and tragic conflict of the past four years. The armed
intifada was a mistake--tactically and still more unfortunately,
strategically.

It was a mistake because without the intifada, the continued
negotiations actually begun after Camp David might well have led to an
agreement after all. This will remain an unknown, for the Clinton
bridging proposals and Taba talks both came too late--against the
backdrop of the violence and the certainty that the Israeli negotiating
partner would not be in office much longer. The major destructive
result, however, was the election of Sharon.

But worse still was the unprecedented (for Israel) degree of terrorism
thrust upon the Israeli public in the course of the intifada, confirming
if not actually creating a very real and deep-seated belief on the part
of Israelis that "there is no partner". While the Likud had long
proclaimed such a situation, and the failure of Camp David appeared to
confirm it, the terror Israelis experienced particularly between
2000-2003 cannot be underestimated as perceived evidence (even in the
eyes of many on the left) that the Palestinians were not willing to live
in peace with Israel. A Palestinian demand for the right of return,
frequently referred to in Israeli propaganda if not in Palestinian
statements, merely concretized the skepticism created by the terror.

And skepticism has given birth to unilateralism. Unilateral withdrawal
of the settlers and the IDF from Gaza is not a bad thing, but
unilateralism cannot bring about a total end to the occupation and
peace, certainly not when it comes to the West Bank, Jerusalem and all
the issues involved. Only an agreed settlement can do that. The
intifada, and Israel's excessive use of force in response, have made it
more difficult yet even more necessary for each side, once again, to
prove to the other side that it is a partner for peace.

