The current accelerated and dangerous economic deterioration in Israel
and the Palestinian Authority derives to a considerable extent from two
factors: security and confidence. Security--at the domestic level in
both Israel and the PA; confidence--on the part of both local and
foreign investors.

First the case of Israel, where the economic downturn is often
attributed by economists to a long list of external factors over which
Israel has no control, such as the global recession, preceded by the
economic crisis in the Far East, and the events of September 11, 2001.
No doubt these events did indeed have a detrimental effect on the
Israeli economy. Some also argue that the heightened security costs
generated by the current Intifada also caused the present crisis, even
though the security budget as a percentage of the total budget was
increased only recently for the first time in decades, and not by a
significant amount.

Yet the primary factor influencing Israel's economy is not the security
budget but the security situation, and particularly the state of the
peace process between Israel and its neighbors. In reviewing the past
decade of economic life in Israel it is difficult to ignore the
correlation between the state of the peace process and the state of the
economy, as reflected in all the relevant indicators: per capita
production, investments, unemployment, etc. The economic boom commenced
when the Shamir government agreed to attend the Madrid Conference and
participate in the peace process that emerged from it. The world opened
its doors, we linked in with the emerging markets in India and China,
and most important--the new atmosphere of confidence produced a steady
stream of foreign and local capital investment.

Yitzhak Shamir was followed by Yitzhak Rabin. The peace process bloomed,
and for three years the Israeli economy achieved unprecedented growth.
Then came the Rabin assassination, an increase in terrorism and a tough
confrontation on the Lebanese border under Shimon Peres, followed by the
election of Binyamin Netanyahu as prime minister. The peace process
nearly ground to a halt. Tensions increased between Israel and its Arab
neighbors, and with Washington. Investments dropped and the economy
deteriorated.

The brief Barak interlude was characterized by optimism regarding the
peace process and by economic growth, particularly in the hi-tech field.
Toward the end of Barak's period in office the Intifada erupted and the
flow of foreign investments decreased. Then came the Sharon era,
characterized by an escalated struggle with the Palestinians and
deterioration of the economy. For the first time in its history Israel
registered a shrinking of its economy ("negative growth") for two
straight years.

This is of course something of an oversimplification; there are
additional specific factors of influence. During the Shamir period an
important catalyst for the Israeli economy was mass immigration from the
former Soviet Union. Netanyahu instituted important monetary reforms
whose positive influence was felt only after the passage of time. Nor is
it the intention here to argue that we must encourage a peace process at
any cost and in any form merely to benefit from economic growth. But the
link between the two is undeniable.

The explanation lies primarily with globalization. Israel's current
dependency on international markets and investments has brought us great
economic bounty; but it can work against us at times of
political-security crisis. The defects and distortions that are built
into our socioeconomic reality, such as huge governmental welfare
expenses to bridge one of the world's largest income gaps, the existence
of an entire sector, the ultra-Orthodox, that consumes national
resources without contributing to the economy, and the presence of
foreign guest-workers in numbers equivalent to the number of our
unemployed, are all relatively invisible as long as the economy grows at
a satisfactory pace. But they become an unbearable burden on the economy
when no growth or negative growth is registered.

Turning to the Palestinian case, we find ourselves back at the Oslo
agreement. The formulators of the Israeli-Palestinian peace process
believed that peace could be based to a large degree on fertile economic
cooperation that would ensure prosperity and constitute a catalyst for
the building of trust and confidence between the two peoples. In
reality, confidence began to collapse the moment the suicide bombings
commenced in the streets of Tel Aviv and Jerusalem during the
Rabin-Peres era. Borders were closed, closures imposed, and the free
flow of labor and goods that is so crucial to prosperity ended. In other
words, the difficult security situation between the two peoples
destroyed confidence. Under these circumstances the collapse of the
Palestinian economy was inevitable, even without the corruption and
mismanagement over which so much ink has been spilled.

Today, against a backdrop of security problems and lack of mutual
confidence, there is no real prospect in the foreseeable future for
successful economic integration between Israel and a future Palestinian
state. Thus anyone planning the rehabilitation of the Palestinian
economy should not rely on attempts to strengthen links to the Israeli
economy in the spirit of Oslo. To the contrary, those links should be
replaced by alternative, non-Israeli sources, for the good of both parties.

This is the sad economic interpretation of the increasingly popular
Israeli term "separation." If separation creates a greater sense of
security on both sides, then it will also contribute to their economies,
even when they lack confidence in one another.

