The significance of the Geneva Accord
                                               is that it has brought
Palestinians and Israelis back to the political track, securing the
continuity of the process that began with the Madrid peace conference.
In a way, too, it has further narrowed the gaps between the two sides on
the substantial issues of the conflict such as borders, refugees,
Jerusalem and security.

While there are some that have dismissed the plan after its flat
rejection by the Israeli government, the fact that the government of
Israel stands vociferously opposed to the accord actually means little.
No sensible politician believes that the political process can possibly
continue under the current Israeli right wing leadership. This
government comes from an ideological and strategic position that is
completely contrary to all of the peace process terms of reference,
especially international law. Therefore, if the peace process is to
progress in official channels, we will have to wait for the arrival of a
government in Israel that is not hostile in principle to the basic
tenets of any peace process that has the hopes of succeeding, the most
important of these tenets being ending Israel's occupation of the West
Bank and Gaza Strip.

One might even go further and hold up the current Israeli government
position against the Geneva Accord as proof that the Israeli government
is elevating its narrow ideological interests above the interests of the
Israeli people. Even when the Palestinians who negotiated this document
showed flexibility over the sticky resolution to the Palestinian refugee
issue, still the Israeli government turned up its nose. Indeed, Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon and his ideological bedfellows will do their best
to avoid giving up their control over the occupied West Bank and Gaza
Strip because they believe not that this land is occupied but, as Sharon
put it bluntly not long ago, it is the rightful homeland of the Jewish
people. In short, that view contradicts the aims of any peace process
based on international legality and supported by the international
community.

The Geneva Accord, which should be perceived as another step in an
ongoing political process aimed at reaching an agreement between the
official representatives of the Palestinian and Israeli peoples, has
finally brought back discussion and debate as to the substance of the
conflict. For too long, the two sides have labored in ongoing hypocrisy
over logistic, security and administrative issues. While these may be
important, their negotiation consumes the parties and prevents them from
discussing the political issues that require debate in order to narrow
the gaps between the two sides. Indeed, this debate is the only way to
move towards peace. It is important that the peace camps in Israel and
Palestine use the Geneva process and document to regroup, because the
future compromise between the different groups on the two sides should
be based on these substantially improved positions.

That is not to say that these improvements have reached the point of
perfection. The actual text requires more tweaking and work, however, as
those efforts are pursued, there is no doubt that when the two official
governments sit for final status negotiations, they will benefit greatly
from the ideas embodied in the Geneva Accord. All that is required is
the closing of some holes and finalizing of some important contours
before the accord and all it represents can be actualized.

