The right of return of Palestinian refugees to their place of origin is
enshrined in four separate bodies of international law: humanitarian
law; human rights law; the law of nationality as applied to state
succession; and refugee law. Beyond these laws, which apply to all
refugees in the world, the UN General Assembly specified the Palestinian
case in Resolution 194                                            ,
paragraph 11 which sets forth a framework for a solution to the problem
of Palestinian refugees, including the possibility of return: "The
refugees wishing to return to their homes and live at peace with their
neighbors should be permitted to do so at the earliest practicable date,
and that compensation should be paid for the property of those choosing
not to return and for loss of or damage to property which, under
principles of international law or in equity, should be made good by the
Governments or authorities responsible."

To understand the importance of the refugee issue to Palestinians, we
must in addition understand that the Palestinian nation and Palestinian
nationalism as it exists today was born with the expulsion of more than
half the Palestinian people from their land in 1948 and one of the
fundamental aspects of Palestinian identity is "refugeehood." Such an
understanding obliges us to address the problem of the Palestinian
refugees as fundamental to any solution of the Palestinian-Israeli
conflict.

There are five reasons for this:

First, as long as the Israelis do not take into consideration what
happened to the Palestinians in 1948 and the expulsion of the indigenous
population from 78 percent of the land of historic Palestine, they will
keep bargaining about the remaining 22 percent (the West Bank including
east Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip). There is no solution to the land
issue without coupling it to the refugee issue. This may be the reason
why Oslo failed.

Secondly, resolving the refugee issue is not just a technical matter of
absorption nor is it a matter of reciting international law like
reciting the Koran. Rather, it is to deconstruct the whole
Palestinian-Israeli conflict to its very premises, to understand how its
causes led to a certain kind of colonial practice, and to recognize the
need for a debate, not just to understand, but to acknowledge and accept
historic responsibility. This is the very precondition for any true
reconciliation and mutual forgiveness, as suggested by Edward Said.

Third, irrespective of whether the final resolution of the conflict
takes the form of a two-state or a bi-national state solution, the
refugee issue cannot be considered secondary. The current intifada has
revealed the importance of the refugees; they are the social and
political actors most unable to bear the impasse in the Oslo process.

Fourth, beyond the moral and symbolic value of realizing the right of
return, the right is useful in creating a framework for providing
refugees with a choice between remaining in their host countries,
returning to their places of origin or coming to a future Palestinian
state (or third countries). The right of choice is a necessity for those
who have, for half a century, been forced to live as aliens without
basic rights in miserable camps and in states that have not always
embraced them with open arms.

Finally, if the right of return and the right of choice is accepted, it
will open many possibilities for the refugees to choose from. The
movement of refugees depends on many factors related to the social,
economic, cultural and identity spheres. The return of refugees does not
mean that the whole refugee community will move. In almost all cases,
the experience of refugees across the world shows that the number of
those who return is less than those who choose other solutions. The
Israeli phobia to return is unjustified.

Hannah Arendt, in her study of totalitarianism, reminds us of "the
decision of statesmen to solve the problem of statelessness by ignoring
it." She insisted on the necessity of examining displacement through the
prism of often xenophobic nation states, and she traced the political
and symbolic logics that had the effect of pathologizing and even
criminalizing refugees. The contemporary linkage that has been forged
between Palestinian return and a disturbance of the regional order,
especially in Israel, attests to the continuing relevance of Arendt's
point.

