Economics have always been a significant part of the ongoing
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Israel has always used economic sanctions
and economic punishment as a major tool for affecting change in the
Palestinian people and their society. In turn, Palestinians, as one way
of achieving their political goals, have tried to pursue activities that
will hinder the Israeli economy.

Equally, economic benefits were a significant incentive for both sides
to participate in the peace process. Palestinians were offered several
packages of economic support from the donor community in order to
compensate them for the damage done by the Israeli occupation, and in
order to build their society and state. Israel also made out well in the
peace process, its economic incentives stemming from new opportunities
opened up immediately after and as a result of peace talks. The
negotiations transformed Israel into a politically integral but
economically advanced component of the Middle East. The direct and
indirect boycott of Israel then came to an end and recent research
indicates that climbing economic indicators in Israel over the last ten
years can be partially explained by the peace process and the end of
Israel's political isolation.

The recent wave of confrontations resulting from the collapse of the
peace process has again demonstrated that economics is a major
battlefield for both sides. As a result of Israeli economic sanctions on
the Palestinian people and their trade and industry, the Palestinian
standard of living has declined by half, those below the poverty line
make up fifty percent of the population, and one out of three
Palestinians of working age are unemployed.

The Israeli economy has not escaped unscathed. Those behind Palestinian
activities in this phase of confrontations have most certainly taken
stock of this effect in making their plans. Israel's nascent economic
relations and regional economic cooperation have been badly affected
because the Arab and Middle East states in general have stopped cozying
up to Israel out of sympathy with Palestinians. In addition, many of the
multinational economic entities that once thought of Israel as a
foothold for their Middle East ventures are now hesitating.

Israel has also been impacted by the Intifada in as much as it has
stopped using cheap Palestinian labor, replacing these workers with
foreign guest workers. Tourists who previously visited Jerusalem and
Bethlehem, pumping significant cash into the Israeli economy, have fled
the region due to security concerns. More generally--and more
important--is the decline in investment, as companies think twice about
entrusting Israel as a stable, safe and secure place for their
investments. Some Israelis, too, are reportedly discussing emigration
from the country, taking themselves and their businesses with them.

One of the possible reasons for this dramatic deterioration in the
Israeli economic outlook is the feeling cultivated among Israelis during
the middle of the peace process that Israel would be able to have its
cake and eat it, too. That is, the economic improvements in Israel after
peace talks, in addition to the security achievements at that time, had
convinced many Israelis that it was not necessary to fulfill their half
of the bargain and turn over land to Palestinians. After all, they were
already enjoying their share of peace, security and economic prosperity.
What concern of the Israeli public was an end to the Israeli occupation?

There is a major lesson to be learned from the collapse of the peace
process, the eruption of violence, and the resulting negative
consequences for the Israeli economy. That lesson is that unless both
sides achieve their political and economic objectives, i.e., peace and
security for Israel, the end of occupation for Palestinians and economic
prosperity for both, it will be difficult for either side to make
sustainable achievements on its own.

