Q: Why did you decide to embark on these negotiations?

A: After the Taba negotiations, we were very close to
reaching an agreement, but the change in the Israeli government after
the elections stopped everything. Therefore, we began to think that this
historic progress that we had made in the previous negotiations should
be finalized. We started to examine which issues at Taba had not been
finalized, and whose resolution would allow us to complete final status
negotiations without leaving anything out and without any ambiguity.

This was the understanding between the Israeli side and us. However, as
time passed, other priorities evolved. The Israeli representatives and
their political tendencies that were involved demonstrated that this
process was special in that it broke the embargo that [Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel] Sharon had imposed.

Q: What were the most difficult areas of debate?

A: I cannot specify one issue. The main thing was to find a
balance between the two positions so that what would be introduced to
the two publics would present a win-win situation. This doesn't mean
that all peace aspirations would be met, but that the basic ones would
be met: [essentially], to let Israelis live without any fear or without
intervention, and to enable the Palestinian people to have their
independent state with East Jerusalem as its capital and also to put an
end to anything that could lead to future hostilities.

So, we decided that the Wailing Wall would be under Israeli sovereignty,
the Haram al Sharif would be under Palestinian sovereignty and East
Jerusalem would be divided between the two states, with part of the city
under Palestinian sovereignty with the exception of the Jewish quarter
which would be under Israeli sovereignty, and a special regime
[comprising] international supervision and guaranteeing freedom of worship.

Q: In some aspects, the agreement holds on to ideas that
have proven to fail, such as, for example, the period of time in which
Israel maintains control over borders and crucial passageways. How are
you convinced that Israel will act in good faith?

A: This is not true. The borders will be controlled by
international forces; a small Israeli contingent will be under the
leadership of the international forces. For a very limited period of
time, the Israelis will remain on the Palestinian borders, but the
border is solely under Palestinian sovereignty and responsibility is
solely international for all the borders with Israel, Egypt and Jordan.
The passageway [between Gaza and the West Bank] will be Israeli, under
the control of the Palestinians. Palestinian police will patrol this
passage and it will be open 24 hours, seven days a week and twelve
months a year.

Q: Did you and Yossi Beilin discuss requiring an official
Israeli apology or acknowledgement of the refugee problem?

A: We tried hard to solve this problem and the compromise we
reached was to commemorate and respect the 1948 locations [the sites of
former Palestinian villages]. This is quite clear in the agreement. I
cannot say that they were ready to accept all of our demands in this
direction.

Q: Has the United States administration responded to the
accord?

A: We are in contact with the Americans. They responded in
the beginning that they welcome an initiative that will lead to peace.
Now we are in the process of explaining to them that this [document] is
not a substitute for the roadmap; on the contrary, it enhances the
roadmap because it fills the hole left in the roadmap concerning a just,
comprehensive solution.

Q: There are those on the Palestinian side who are
dismissing this agreement because it comes at a time when the Israeli
government is not ideologically predisposed to accept it. Is the
agreement just a PR exercise?

A: I think it is not only a public relations exercise--it is
a very direct political message to both publics that there is a possible
leadership and there is a possible solution at a time when extremists
are trying to justify the continuation of this war, saying that there
are no partners and there is no solution.

Notice that the main attack (besides that of Ariel Sharon) against the
agreement came from [former Prime Minister Ehud] Barak. This at least
embarrasses--if not completely crushes--his claims that he was generous
at Camp David and that the Palestinians rejected his offer. It shows
that they didn't offer the minimum of what was required at Camp David,
that [the talks] were intentionally ambiguous and that he collaborated
with Sharon to give him political cover for his campaign against the
Palestinian people, claiming that there was no Palestinian partner.

Now there is a solution /and/ a partnership and that is why Barak and
Sharon are attacking this agreement and trying to undermine the bid
between the Israeli peace camp and us to move our nations towards a
solution and away from this daily destruction.

