Yasser Arafat's departure from the scene is an appropriate time to
revisit the question of who started the current conflict. Simply stated,
had Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) been leader of the PLO in late
September-early October 2000, I doubt very much the conflict would have
broken out. If it had broken out, it would not have become entrenched
over the past four years.

Undoubtedly, Ehud Barak was at fault, too, as were his predecessors,
Netanyahu, Peres and Rabin. All contributed to the Palestinians' list of
grievances, many legitimate, in what was a nuanced patchwork of cause
and effect. But it was Arafat who believed that violence "works" with
Israelis (and with fellow Arabs as well), and who ignored opportunities
to exercise his leadership and stop the conflict once it broke out.

Arafat was wrong about violence. Without reliance on violence, and had
he been ready for genuine peace, he could have had a Palestinian state
in the West Bank and Gaza Strip back in the 1980s, based on the first
Camp David process. More than a decade later, he demonstrated to
President Clinton on January 2, 2001--in rejecting Clinton's peace
initiative--that (in the description of Dennis Ross, confirmed by Saudi
Prince Bandar and senior Palestinians) "he could live with a process,
but not a conclusion". There was an obvious symbiosis between Arafat's
mafia-style inclination to violence and his inability to complete the
peace process.

Arafat's misinterpretation of two Israeli decisions that more closely
preceded the current conflict is illustrative. One was the Hashmonean
tunnel incident in September 1996, which led a panicky Prime Minister
Binyamin Netanyahu literally to embrace Arafat in Washington and enter
the process that led to the Hebron agreement. The other was the
unilateral withdrawal from Lebanon in May 2000. Both moves still make
sense to Israelis. But they were undoubtedly interpreted by
Arafat--incorrectly, as events have proven--as indications that Israelis
did indeed only understand the language of violence.

The violence associated with the Hashmonean tunnel events, incidentally,
also had a direct effect on the tactics the Israel Defense Forces
employed in the early weeks of the current struggle--tactics that
appeared to backfire by helping prolong rather than shorten the
conflict. In three days of fighting in September 1996, Israel lost 15
soldiers and border policemen (compared with close to 100 Palestinian
dead). The IDF considered this to be far too high a casualty rate, and
one that would encourage more Palestinian violence. Accordingly, the
army resolved that, if and when another round of fighting broke out, it
would adopt more aggressive tactics with the objective of keeping its
losses low and driving home to Palestinians the lesson that violence
against Israel was counterproductive. Under then Chief of Staff Shaul
Mofaz the IDF prepared carefully for this eventuality.

Sure enough, after the first week or so of the Aqsa intifada there were
about 100 Palestinian dead and only one Israeli soldier killed in
action. I recall a Palestinian friend phoning me at this time to
complain about this asymmetrical kill ratio and accuse the IDF of
killing many unarmed Palestinians; I replied that he could hardly expect
me to apologize because not enough Israelis had been killed to satisfy
Palestinian needs. In the event, the effect on the Palestinians was the
exact opposite of what the IDF expected: rather than capitulating, they
redoubled their resolve to fight and extract heavy casualties from
Israel as well.

Placing the principal blame on Arafat does not necessarily mean an
endorsement of the thesis, promulgated by senior Israeli security
officials like Maj. Gen. (res.) Amos Gilad (who headed the assessment
branch of IDF Intelligence in September 2000), that Arafat had carefully
planned this new armed struggle as part and parcel of a strategy of
subduing Israel through "Palestinization"--illegal migration and
eventual agreed "return"--and violent intimidation. This gives too much
credit to Arafat as master strategist. In fact, to understand his
ultimate failure in this intifada as well as in the peace process as a
whole, we have to recognize that concerning the conflict with Israel he
was more a follower than a leader, more a tactician than a strategist.

Would the conflict have erupted had Ariel Sharon rather than Ehud Barak
been prime minister in September 2000? Undoubtedly. But Sharon was not
prime minister at that time precisely because Israelis had elected Barak
to take daring steps for peace--at which he proved a failure--and to
withdraw from Lebanon. It was only when confronted with the new conflict
in all its ferocity, and convinced that Arafat was the protagonist, that
Israelis then elected Sharon to fight the war.

