About a million and a half poor people; 300,000 unemployed; the State
Prosecutor investigating Prime Minister Ariel Sharon; 550,000 children
below the poverty line; 12 women, one for each month, murdered during
the past year by their partners; the Israel Police investigating Labor
Party Chairman Amram Mitzna; some 15,000 families over the past year
involved in eviction proceedings due to inability to pay their
mortgages; about 150,000 eligible persons, including the elderly,
disabled and new immigrants, waiting for public housing that has almost
entirely ceased to be built inside the Green Line; rent support for the
needy reduced during the past year, thereby forcing many to move to
focal points of unemployment on the periphery or across the Green Line;
the police investigating the primaries corruption scandal of Likud
Member of Knesset Naomi Blumenthal; according to police reports, nearly
40 percent of new immigrant youth from the former Soviet Union using
drugs; a special Knesset committee investigating the decline in the
level of mathematics education in Israeli schools.

This is the face of Israeli society in 2003.

Taken at face value, there is no link among these phenomena; their
connection to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict is even more tenuous.
Some are economic and welfare-oriented, some societal, while others
involve issues of political integrity. Yet at the most fundamental level
they are all linked by an invisible thread: growing poverty, a deepening
corruption of norms, a weakening democracy, growing interpersonal
violence, declining educational levels--all byproducts of the ongoing
conflict.

Their common denominator is that they all grow in the dark. For nearly
36 years, since June 1967, the Israeli spotlight has been pointed at one
arena only, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. When the spotlight focuses
on only one point, everything else is in the dark. And it is well known
that in the dark, far from scrutiny, a lot of bad things can happen.
Many in Israel have lately been quoting American Supreme Court Justice
Brandeis, who said that "sunlight is the most powerful of all
disinfectants." He was referring primarily to the transparency required
in order to maintain orderly democratic life, but his remark can be
applied to all walks of life, simply because with light you can see, and
with darkness you can't.

Thus the darkness facilitates the growth of poverty, crime, hunger and
corruption. The problem is not only that the situation mortgages
economic and financial resources in ways that increase the damage
inflicted on widespread strata of society--primarily Arabs,
ultra-Orthodox and new immigrants. Worse, this "situation" mortgages
intellectual and emotional resources to the extent that it renders
Israeli society indifferent concerning everything happening within it as
well.

Even the word "situation" is a byproduct of the "situation": a nebulous,
laundered term that replaces a genuine effort to cope. Generally it
refers to the ongoing occupation and control over another people, the
repeated terrorist attacks, the anxiety level and depth of pain that
characterize Israeli life. Instead of courageously coping with each of
these dilemmas, we speak in generalities about the "situation" as an
ineluctable act of god.

This characterization applies equally to Israeli right and left. Both
ends of the political spectrum are well aware of the economic, social
and moral price that the ongoing conflict is exacting from Israelis. Put
simply, the right still argues that the price is justified, or that
there is no alternative, while the left is of two views. There are those
who are more concerned with the ongoing damage inflicted by Israel on
its neighbors, while others are worried primarily about the damage
inflicted upon ourselves.

Nor are the two blocs of equal size. Over the past two years the
attacks, which have cost more than 700 Israeli lives, including many
children, have left little room for considerations of morality. While a
growing camp on the left does focus on the question of what this is
doing to us, its voice is lost in the din of terrorist attacks and
military operations in the territories. In this symbiotic conflict, the
questions regarding what all this does to "them" and what it does to
"us" are inextricably linked.

Israel's recent electoral campaign painfully illustrated the corrosive
effect of the conflict on Israeli society. In a reality where the ranks
of the unemployed grow daily and more people slip under the poverty
line, the elections might have been expected to focus on these issues.
But that was not the case. Once again the election broadcasts focused on
Arafat, campaigns were promoted with shots of tanks heading into combat,
and close-ups of terrorist attacks were shown to recruit votes. It
worked. The weak and the poor, who should have demanded change in their
own name, are once again supporting the same regime that brought them to
this impasse. Even they lack the internal space to consider their own
welfare.

The depth of despair is illustrated by the fact that this was the first
election campaign in which the left did not promise peace and the right
did not promise security. On the other hand, in the course of the
campaign suspicions arose concerning acts of corruption in the Likud
primaries, and published reports cast a heavy shadow over the behavior
of senior members of the establishment. Nobody cared. The public is
incapable of probing such issues while it is waiting for a possible
mega-terrorist attack or is listening for the clatter of Israeli tanks
entering Palestinian cities.

Thus, under cover of darkness and noise, the welfare state collapses and
democracy is eroded--for nearly 36 years.

