Recent Egyptian efforts, which have intensified during the past few
weeks, continue a long-standing Egyptian commitment to the peace process
in the Middle East. However, this time they also serve a specific
purpose related to the deteriorating Israeli-Palestinian situation,
which has been in urgent need of international attention. At a time when
the United States, the country leading the international community in
sponsoring this peace process, is busy with its own election and
involved directly in another bloody conflict in the region, the Egyptian
role becomes a necessity.

The latest meeting of the Quartet took place in May immediately after
the disastrous summit between US President George W. Bush and Israeli
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. (That summit included Bush's infamous
assurances to Sharon, which were judged by many members of the
international community, including most European countries, to
contradict international law.) The Quartet meeting produced an action
plan which included--among other things--the need for an Egyptian role
in mediation between Israel and Palestine.

The Egyptian efforts simply stem from the different components and
obligations that make up the first phase of the roadmap, in addition to
other components taken from the Sharon plan of unilateral disengagement
from the Gaza Strip. The Egyptians have divided these obligations into
two sets: one for the Palestinians and another for the Israelis.

From the Palestinians, the Egyptians are requiring an end to all kinds
of violence against Israelis and the rehabilitation, empowerment, and
consolidation of the security forces. The goals of security force reform
are to fulfill the commitment to preventing Palestinian violence against
Israelis and to maintain law and order for Palestinians. The Egyptians
also require that the Palestinians continue realizing reforms promised
earlier, in addition of course to being committed to resuming the peace
process and implementing the roadmap.

From the Israeli side, the Egyptians demand that in addition to ending
assassinations and other forms of violence, settlement expansion must
stop. On the Gaza plan, the Egyptians are clear that they expect full
withdrawal, including from borders and crossing points, and desire an
international presence instead, in addition to clear and meaningful
roadmap implementation steps in the West Bank.

The first to sound an alarm was Osama el Baz, the political advisor of
President Mubarak, who made the point that the plan approved by the
Israeli cabinet contradicts to a large extent the Egyptian plan. This
leaves clear doubts as to whether Israel has the intention of helping
Egypt succeed in these efforts or not.

The latest negative sign on these questions came in the unnecessary,
unprovoked, and ill-timed Israeli assassination of eight Palestinian
activists in Nablus. The Egyptians had just begun efforts toward
reaching an understanding with Israel and the Palestinian Authority on
arrangements to resolve the problem of some of these groups in a way
that is compatible with the Egyptian peace efforts.

The Egyptian initiative's chances of success will depend to a large
extent on whether or not the Americans back it and the Israelis give it
a chance. The Palestinian leadership is positive toward these efforts,
but as in the past, its ability to fulfill its share of the roadmap's
obligations will depend on whether or not there is reciprocity. Each
side must discharge its obligations, because an act like the Nablus
assassinations will definitely jeopardize the ability of the Palestinian
side to succeed in its efforts.

