The Ras al-Amud settlement is one of several significant projects that
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon chose to pursue as the outside world
was busy with the agitation of the war on Iraq. Another was the
expropriation of land for a different kind of settlement project: in the
northern West Bank, the bulldozers constructing miles of Israeli wall
can be heard working non-stop. But the Ras al-Amud Jewish settlement is
especially dangerous from the Palestinian perspective because it
signifies yet another change in the Jerusalem status quo, i.e. it is one
more step forward for the tenacious Israeli policy of altering
Jerusalem's demography and therefore jeopardizing peace negotiations.

Jerusalem has always been one of the most significant points of dispute
in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The Oslo agreements listed it among
the final status negotiating issues in 1993 and it was one of the most
troublesome negotiations issues at Camp David in the summer of 2000,
after which talks fell apart. In microcosm, the Ras al-Amud settlement
project reflects the significance and sensitivity of the Jerusalem
component as a whole. Further, conflicts over Jerusalem embody the
entire Palestinian-Israeli conflict in that they engage the crucial
issues of land, population, Israeli settlements and final borders. That
is precisely why the Israeli occupation has pursued an aggressive policy
of trying to predetermine the outcome of those disputes with unabashed
public planning to Judaize the city's Palestinian areas.

The Israeli government has managed this from all angles: building
complexes to add more Israeli Jews in the eastern, occupied half of the
city, thus affecting its demographic composition; denying Palestinians
building permits to diminish their presence; as well as rescinding the
identity cards of Arab Jerusalem residents who cannot produce the pile
of paperwork necessary to prove that their "center of life" is in the city.

More recently, Jerusalem's Israeli settlements have grown to such
magnitude that they follow a new rationale of surrounding Palestinian
populated areas and physically preventing their expansion. The
Palestinians therefore live on islands surrounded by Israeli settlements
that were built on confiscated Palestinian land. Ras al-Amud will close
one of these circles in a way that blocks the continuity of Palestinian
populated areas, preventing independence--and in the big picture--the
essence of the two-state solution.

The strategic mistake that Israeli policymakers are committing in
continuing this course of action is located in their belief that the
creation of new facts will have to be considered in any final peace
settlement, regardless of those facts' legality. That mentality was
illustrated in the Israeli proposal for solving the Jerusalem problem at
the Camp David negotiations. Israel suggested that the solution be based
on its annexation of what has already been confiscated in East
Jerusalem. Israel simply assumed that Palestinians would have to
recognize its spoils as fact, given the situation on the ground. In
return, Palestinians were to be given some modicum of control over those
parts of East Jerusalem that Israel has not attempted to annex during
the last 35 years of occupation. No one needs to be reminded that this
formula did not work, and is the reason we are in this crisis today.

As such, the strategy of creating facts will not increase Israel's
winnings in the final negotiations--when we arrive at that point--as
much as they will reduce the chances for making peace between the two
sides. Palestinians, whose sole recourse in this imbalance of power is
international law, will not accept any agreement that permits Israel to
claim land that was confiscated by force because international law is
very clear on this point. International law and the relevant Security
Council resolutions refer to all of the territories occupied in 1967 as
territories under a belligerent military occupation. These tenets remain
codified today in the Quartet roadmap                        , which
seems to be gaining momentum. Its preamble reads: "The settlement will
resolve the Israel-Palestinian conflict, and end the occupation that
began in 1967, based on the foundations of the Madrid Conference, the
principle of land for peace, UNSCRs 242, 338 and 1397, agreements
previously reached by the parties, and the initiative of Saudi Crown
Prince Abdullah." Ending the occupation means ending all means of
controlling Palestinians, including attempts to surround them or
outnumber them by force.

