Camp David, which followed intensive preparatory negotiations in Sweden,
was for Israel an important benchmark in the process, rather than a
final conclusion of it. It aimed at bringing about an end to the
occupation, and, it was hoped, an end to the conflict.

The Palestinians' approach to the summit stemmed from a search for
historic justice. In addition, it entailed exploiting political
negotiations as a phase in the ongoing clash of cultures, religions and
peoples.

There was thus a significant gap in the way both parties conceived of
the purpose of the summit. This conceptual gap affected the unfolding of
events far more than any of the mistakes made by either of the parties
or the mistrust that characterized their relationship along the way.

At Camp David, it was Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat who critically
failed. This is my view, indeed, but I also believe that the bulk of
Palestinian society understands it now as well: the tragedy that has
befallen them over the past two and a half years has a nametag on it.
The talks in Camp David and pursuant to it could have paved the way
towards ending the occupation, much as the roadmap
                                                 does.

When the dialogue does resume, as we have to believe it will, it is
absolutely vital that we draw the lessons of the collapse of the Camp
David summit. Among numerous such lessons I would suggest the following:

/First, there must be preparation of public opinion./ The "historic
compromise" concealed in the agreement almost reached at Camp David was
not well explained to the respective constituencies. In Israel,
commentaries focused on what we were likely to be giving up rather than
the benefits of transformation or the fruits of peace. It seems almost
obvious that concerted effort and attention must be given to continuous,
comprehensive public relations--explaining to the public the thinking
behind the political process.

But this did not happen, or at least not sufficiently. Arafat for his
part never clearly projected a readiness to reach a true historic
compromise with Zionism, based on the partition of the Land of Israel
into two independent political entities. And in the absence of any other
directive from above, the ongoing hostility and wild incitement fell on
fertile ground. To this I would add the need to establish moderate
international and Arab coalitions to sustain United States policy, a
lesson already well learned and implemented by President George W. Bush.

/Second, attention must be paid to both sides' perceptions, not just to
the objective facts./ On the issue of the refugees, for example, it was
the image of things that held sway over the substance. Here was an ethos
that had been built up and nurtured over decades as one of the
cornerstones of the Palestinian national struggle. The Palestinian
negotiators considered it their duty to show that the suffering of the
refugees had come to an end and that their dream was about to be
realized, even if only formally. As a result, for many of our
Palestinian counterparts, the wording of this section in the draft
agreement was far more important than the practical mechanisms to be set
up to help rehabilitate the refugees, or the effort to mobilize the
international community on their behalf.

/Third, careful thought must be given to the question of process
management./ Sometimes it may be as important as the substance and
content of negotiations. When parties move towards closing such a
dramatic "deal", the process must be kept very well defined and very
strict. A rigid framework is needed with a rigid agenda from which the
parties cannot be allowed to deviate. This was definitely not the case
at Camp David. Indeed, it started with an orderly procedure of
presenting positions, setting out respective interests and then giving
each of the sides their respective "assignments". The facilitator
hosting the summit got off to a good start. However, there was no
follow-up. The mechanism later collapsed, and the business-like,
pragmatic atmosphere that had marked the beginning simply fell away. The
process was unclear and disorganized. I hope that the same pattern does
not repeat itself in the process of pushing President Bush's Middle East
roadmap forward.

/Fourth, the permanent status core issues are all interlinked./ It is
not possible to isolate any single issue from the others. The approach
adopted by the Israeli negotiators was predicated on a readiness to
discuss far-reaching ideas for solving all these issues, as long as
nothing was considered agreed and binding until everything was agreed.
For their part, the Palestinians' suspicion that Israel was seeking a
way to deceive the world and perpetuate the occupation prevailed over
any reasonable explanations to the contrary.

/Fifth, timing is crucial./ The Clinton proposals
                                                of December 2000 were
ready as early as August 2000. They followed up on as many as 50
extensive daily negotiations, recapping the convergences reached in Camp
David between the parties. Had President Clinton presented them then,
capitalizing on the momentum remaining from the summit, I believe the
outcome might have been different. In the event, a very different
momentum of violence was brought into being and the historic opportunity
was lost. Sadly enough, there was no realistic US contingency plan in
place, and no fallback or exit strategies prepared in anticipation of
the summit's failure.

