The road map presented by the Bush administration and the Quartet to
Israel and the Palestinians is at one and the same time futile, yet
important.

It is futile because it is sponsored by an American president who is not
interested right now in advancing an Israeli-Palestinian peace process.
It was presented to the emissaries of a Palestinian leader who has no
realistic strategy for peace (or war), who is relegated by the document
to a ceremonial role, but who is not likely to step aside. And it was
delivered to an Israeli prime minister who also has no realistic
strategy for peace or war and who, like his Palestinian counterpart, has
no intention of following this or any other internationally sanctioned
road map.

The government of Israel is justified in pointing out that the road map
does not require of the Palestinians a serious enough effort to suppress
terrorism. And its concerns about the ramifications of an international
monitoring mechanism are understandable. On the other hand the document
comprises measures, such as the appointment and empowerment of a
Palestinian prime minister and the introduction of performance-based
criteria rather than hard and fast deadlines for moving from one phase
to the next, that reflect Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's own
policy line.

But all this is not terribly relevant. Since President Bush will not
provide the muscle to enforce this plan upon the reluctant Sharon and
Arafat, the detailed press accounts of high level discussions of its
strong and weak points appear to be of marginal importance, except
insofar as they constitute part of a diplomatic ritual apparently
required by the administration during the countdown to a US invasion of
Iraq. Nor does it appear likely that, after Iraq, the Bush
administration will commit itself to the necessary total involvement in
an Israeli-Palestinian peace process. But if it does, circumstances are
likely to have changed to such an extent that new thinking, and a new
document, will be called for.

Still, the draft road map of October 15, 2002 is an important document,
because its contents clearly reflect a number of positive developments
in overall thinking about a future Israeli-Palestinian peace process
that have accrued in the course of two years of violence and in the
aftermath of the collapse of the Oslo process.

First of all, the road map recognizes that United Nations Security
Council Resolution 242 of 1967 is not a sufficient basis for
Israeli-Palestinian peace. Oslo final status talks, we recall, were
based solely on 242, which does not offer guidelines for resolving key
issues like Palestinian statehood, Jerusalem and the refugee question.
UNSC 242 was intended by its drafters for peacemaking between Israel and
the neighboring states it fought in 1967; it did not provide a framework
for solving "1948" issues like the right of return. This is one of the
reasons the Oslo process ultimately failed. The road map takes a step
toward righting this lacuna by basing a final settlement not only on
242/338, but also on UNSC 1397 (affirming the goal of a Palestinian
state) and on the so-called Saudi initiative, noting specifically its
revolutionary provision for "Arab state acceptance of normal relations
with Israel and security for all the states of the region." These are
good building blocks for future peace efforts.

The road map also calls for a single interim step--a Palestinian "state
with provisional borders" by the end of 2003, i.e., within about a year.
Phases and interim steps were one of the great failures of the Oslo
process. They were supposed to serve as a vehicle for building trust and
confidence between the two sides; instead, they provided opportunities
for extremists on both sides to undermine the entire process. Still, if
some sort of phased process is deemed inevitable in view of the current
collapse, then the notion of a provisional state, broached originally by
Ariel Sharon himself, may be the least problematic--but only if
Palestinians receive adequate assurances that such a truncated temporary
entity does not become a dead end.

Finally, despite Israeli objections, the Quartet's "permanent monitoring
mechanism" is potentially a good idea, for the simple reason that
Israelis and Palestinians have proven incapable of monitoring their
agreements on their own. The absence of such mechanisms in the Oslo
agreements was yet another fatal drawback of the peace process that
ended two years ago. Indeed, an eventual Israeli-Palestinian final
status peace treaty will have to comprise some sort of compulsory
arbitration agreement (like in the Israeli-Egyptian peace treaty) if it
is to survive the inevitable disagreements over interpretation.

The monitoring mechanism for Israeli-Palestinian stabilization measures
envisioned by the road map--if properly constituted so as to provide
solutions for Israel's well-founded concerns about violent Palestinian
violations (along with Palestinian concerns over settlement
expansion)--is yet another of the long term positive contributions of
this new initiative, however futile and frustrating it may be in the
near term.

