Q: How did United States envoy William Burns present the
roadmap to the Palestinian side?

A: It was done in a meeting outlining elements that the United
States believes are important in order to get on a track of
negotiations. It was not done through any sort of consultative means. In
fact, it was done by telling the Palestinians that this is the vision
that they had. Nonetheless, I was told that [the meeting] was very
positive, but that there are some concerns about the actual roadmap.

Q: Can you talk some about those concerns?

A: The concerns are that we are going down the same path that we
have now been going down for the last two years. The United States has
still not recognized that there is a direct link between Israel's lack
of security and Palestinian freedom. Instead what the United States is
trying to do is to not confront Israel on its settlement policies, not
confront Israel on its 35-year occupation, but pandering to Israel by
reassuring Israel that it can get security without ever giving up land
and the settlements.

Now there is also the question of "reform", in other words that
Palestinians must "humanize" themselves in order for Israel to finally
end its illegal occupation of Palestinian territory.

Q: What were your consultations with the United States
leading up the presentation of the document?

A: What our submissions repeatedly said was that it is very
important that the United States focus on the link between security and
freedom and not simply aggregate the two issues, as if Palestinians are
somehow genetically pre-disposed to violence and as if the settlements
are somehow organic in nature. Sadly, the United States has not
recognized that link and is instead delaying a settlement freeze--the
very cause for this uprising and end in negotiations--until a later phase.

The other thing that we really pushed for was some sort of monitoring
mechanism. What we saw over the course of the Oslo was that there was no
third party monitoring on the ground. Again, the United States is
hesitant to take on the role.

Q: How do you think that the Palestinian leadership will
respond to the demand for an "empowered Palestinian prime minister?"

A: I am not sure how they will respond to that specifically, but in
my own personal view it is somewhat misguided. When Palestinians were
saying that they wanted reforms, these two very nations [Israel and the
United States] were the ones saying that they did not want reforms.

What this actually means is that they do not want to deal with the
elected leader [i.e., President Yasser Arafat]. But if they don't want
to deal with the elected leader, then why are they blocking elections to
recreate some sort of dictatorship regime where the prime minister is
imposed, rather than allowing Palestinians to exercise
self-determination and elect their own leader?

Q: Is that your understanding as to why the document calls
for Legislative Council elections and not presidential elections?

A: Precisely. The major call for reforms and elections came this
summer, when we pushed the United States for elections. We were told
that the timing wasn't right. That makes us ask, "Are you actually
serious about reform or are you interested in a puppet regime that will
pander to the interests of the United States and Israel?"

Q: It seems that President Arafat is making some efforts to
move ahead in this vein, but are there attempts being made to change the
roadmap?

A: We submitted our own remarks on the roadmap at that last meeting
and we are going to continue to try to highlight to the US
administration that certain elements of it should be changed, otherwise
it will be an unworkable and untenable plan. I just heard today that
[Israeli Prime Minister Ariel] Sharon has accepted the roadmap but
rejected the settlement freeze--an essential element.

So again, we are going to continue to press for a settlement freeze,
arguing that unless Palestinians see that there is some change on the
ground, telling Palestinians that there may be some temporary,
provisional, borderless state that is the size of an Indian reservation
is not going to end anything.

Q: Given the situation on the ground right now, and given
this road map, which offers Palestinians a state in 2004 or 2005, can
you make any assessments as to what you see in the near and far future?

A: If the international community actually believes that it wants an
end to the conflict, then they will put in place the measures that are
necessary to end it--enforcing the law against Israel and its
colonization and starting to apply sanctions.

If the United States, the world community and Israel itself do not do
that, then we are going to see the same level of colonization, we might
see mass numbers of people leaving the occupied Palestinian territories
or you might see an anti-apartheid movement in which you have millions
of Palestinians saying that they want to seek citizenship in the state
of Israel. I think that it will be a greater threat to
Israel--particularly if Israel wants to remain what it calls a "Jewish
state"--to have an additional 3.5 million Palestinians seeking Israeli
citizenship.

Q: I understand that your office has given the United States
a memo stating that the Palestine Liberation Organization may be forced
to change its two-state strategy.

A: We have basically concluded that if the colonization continues at
this pace, we are going to have to start questioning whether a two-state
solution is even plausible. That is not to say that we are not committed
to the two-state solution; the PLO has been committed to that since 1988.

But given the facts on the ground, given the way that things have
changed, one cannot unscramble an egg. The leadership is going to have
to start reassessing whether it really should be pushing for a two-state
solution or whether we should start pushing for equal citizenship and an
anti-apartheid campaign along the same lines as South Africa.

