How much of this conflict is personal? None of it--and a lot of it.

None of it, because this is one more chapter in the conflict between two
national liberation movements for control over Eretz Yisrael/Palestine.
Because both Arafat and Sharon were elected, and continue to command the
allegiance of their publics for their policies. Because if both were
removed from the scene tomorrow, the conflict would almost certainly
continue.

A lot of it, because both Arafat and Sharon appear to be managing this
conflict on the basis of specific mindsets and strategic concepts that
might change radically--for better or for worse--if either or both were
to leave the scene.

Two personal reminiscences may help to illustrate the point. The first
is of a meeting with Arafat in his office in Gaza; it is typical of the
three or four such meetings I have participated in over the years since
1994. Arafat explains that Israel is really two-thirds an Arab country:
the Israeli Arabs and the "Jewish Arabs" (i.e., Sephardic and Yemenite
Jews) already make up 70 percent of the population. He goes on to blame
the Mossad for Palestinian suicide bombings. When his leadership is
questioned, he goes on an egomaniacal rant: "I am Mandela, I am de
Gaulle." He is asked about a CNN clip in which he is seen praising
children who recite slogans of incitement; he says he will discipline
their teachers! In short, he comes across as a liar who is totally out
of touch with Israeli (and Jewish) reality. From this performance it is
but a short distance to his insistence in 2000 on the right of return
and his rejection of any Jewish link to the Temple Mount, and to his
denial of the Iranian arms ship in 2002.

The second reminiscence is a one-on-one meeting with Ariel Sharon in
1994. The topic is settlements. Sharon leans over the map and points to
a desolate corner of Judea in the southern West Bank. "There's a Bedouin
tribe in this wadi," he indicates, "and a related tribe in the next
wadi. I plant an Israeli settlement on the hilltop between them in order
to ensure that the two tribes don't link up. This is the essence of the
settlement strategy." It is also the essence of Sharon's manipulative
approach to dealing with Arabs in general. He believes in using
settlements to fragment the Palestinian population and prevent the
emergence of a politically and demographically contiguous entity. From
here we can trace a direct line to current policies designed to scuttle
the Oslo process, avoid being drawn into substantive negotiations over
territory--or even into a settlement construction freeze--and bring
about Arafat's removal in order to manipulate the Palestinian leadership
structure.

Arafat is apparently not a candidate for a serious and conclusive peace
process. No amount of pressure will affect his nature. But he should not
be removed: the consequences are liable to be more dangerous than the
present reality. Toward this end, we and the US should remain in contact
with him. We may be able to coerce him into stabilizing the situation
and entering into tactical and temporary, interim-type agreements. With
or without him, no comprehensive agreement is in sight.

But without him, we will wait for years before a Palestinian leader with
his authority emerges. Meanwhile, we may have to deal with chaos or with
Hamas. In a best case scenario of Arafat's departure, the younger
generation of more pragmatic Palestinian leaders, who admittedly know
and understand Israel far better than Arafat, will vie for leadership.
They will seek to ensure they are not stigmatized as Israeli puppets, by
adopting positions at least as extreme as Arafat's--but without the
popular authority to rule.

Nor will Sharon alter his basic approach to Palestinians and to
manipulating the leadership structure among our neighbors. But because
he learned from the Lebanon fiasco of 1982-83 not to proceed with his
designs without ensuring a broad consensus of support--a unity
government, high ratings in the polls, US backing--he is very cautious
this time. Each Israel Defense Force incursion into Area A goes a few
meters deeper, then withdraws in deference to the consensus--until
Arafat in his folly provides the next monstrous provocation.

Palestinians complain profusely about Arafat's destructive policies
behind his back; almost never in public. They both fear him and revere
him: the symbol of Palestinian nationalism. By and large they do not, it
should be noted, share the negative Israeli/"western" perception of
Arafat as compulsive liar and dangerous fantasizer. This is but one
aspect of the current broad disconnect between the two sides. Meanwhile,
in Israel, pointed criticism of Sharon by the parliamentary opposition
and by some in the coalition, along with a deteriorating economy and
security situation, have seemingly little effect on the 70 percent or so
of the public that continues to support him.

For want of a better description, and with apologies for the
oxymoron--we're stuck in an escalating status quo.

