A week after the assassination by Israel of Sheikh Ahmad Yassin, it is
easy to draw up a list of justifications for the act. It is equally easy
to demonstrate that on balance the killing was a serious mistake,
reflecting a dangerous absence of strategic wisdom on the part of its
perpetrators. But this entire discussion of the assassination of a
terrorist must not be allowed to obfuscate the more important basic fact
that the assassinations reflect: none of the relevant leaders has a
realistic strategy for peace, or even for ending the violence.

This targeted killing was justified because Sheikh Yassin was a major
terrorist leader, and in the post 9/11 era there are no longer
inhibitions about eliminating terrorist leaders. It was popular with the
Israeli public because the public, legitimately, wants its terrorist
tormentors to be punished. With Israel having announced its plan to
leave the Gaza Strip, it was legitimate to expect that terrorism from
and within Gaza would cease; when it did not, and when Hamas leaders,
with Hezbollah's backing, escalated the terrorism (the Ashdod port
attack), it made sense to launch a campaign to send a message of
strength, and to diminish Hamas in favor of more moderate Palestinians,
as part and parcel of the withdrawal plan. And while the murder of a
quadriplegic political-religious figure in a wheelchair as he was
leaving a mosque undoubtedly seems grotesque and cynical, it does send a
deterrent message to Yassin's fellow religious terrorist leaders:
witness the effect of the humiliating capture of Saddam Hussein on the
likes of Libyan leader Moammar Qaddafi. A previous round of
assassinations led Hamas to agree to a hudna or ceasefire.

There is also an obvious political angle--cynical, but real--to the
Yassin killing. By this act, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon silenced the
militant critics of his disengagement plan within the Likud, and
seemingly enhanced his "irreplaceable" status in anticipation of a
possible criminal indictment. Some would add that there is an
international angle, too--one that refers to the global war on
terrorism: the election of the Zapatero government in Spain, with its
platform of withdrawing from Iraq on the heels of the Qaeda attacks in
Madrid, ostensibly sealed Yassin's fate, in the sense that a strong and
aggressive anti-terrorist message was called for to counter the
impression of appeasement emanating from Spain.

All these arguments and more can be mustered to justify the Yassin
assassination. Yet it remains an act of futility, if not stupidity.
While it may reduce Hamas' capabilities by striking at one leader and
forcing others to go deep underground, it does not deter; on the
contrary, it only increases the motivation of both the lower ranks and
the leadership to kill Israelis, now including Israeli political
leaders. While some moderate Arab leaders who fear militant Islam may
secretly rejoice over Yassin's killing, they remain angry at Israel and
embarrassed by its actions. Jordan's King Abdullah, in particular, was
compromised and weakened in Arab eyes because he had met with Sharon
scarcely two days before the assassination. Plans for the end-March
Tunis Arab summit to reinforce the commendable Saudi peace initiative of
two years ago were scrapped (along with the entire summit) by
compromised Arab moderates. Perhaps of most concern, Yassin's martyrdom
is liable to incite the Arab street to greater religious extremism and
anti-Americanism, far from the borders of Israel.

After balancing out the pros and cons of this assassination, and in
general of the policy of assassinating the political leadership of
anti-Israeli terrorist organizations, the bottom line points to the
strategic bankruptcy not just of Israel, but of all the relevant
parties. Israel and the Palestinians appear to be capable of responding
only to violence. It is difficult in logical terms to support the
convoluted claim that we are softening up Gaza in March 2004 in
anticipation of a justified withdrawal that is sponsored by a lame duck
prime minister for all the wrong reasons (e.g., holding onto the West
Bank) and which, if it happens, is scheduled for the summer of 2005. The
seemingly endless succession of empty slogans emanating from the Israel
Defense Forces (IDF) leadership since this intifada began--"let the IDF
win," "burn defeat into their consciousness," "Hamas is a strategic
enemy" (what was it before, a tactical enemy?)--all reflect the lack of
a strategy for ending the violence and winning the peace.

Yasser Arafat and the Palestinian leadership, including that of Hamas,
have even less of a claim to a realistic strategy: they started the
current conflict, have suffered far more, and appear to have learned
nothing, whereas Sharon is at least planning to disengage. And US
President George W. Bush seems oblivious to the damage caused by our
conflict to his program of "freedom and democracy" in the Middle East.

If only Sharon at least had a realistic strategy for peace,
assassinations might not be necessary. Certainly they would be far more
justified.

