Unofficial contacts between Palestinians and Israelis have flourished
under two circumstances: when there is potential for progress based on
narrowing gaps in the political thinking of the two respective publics,
and when the official relationship between the two sides is in crisis.
The period preceding the Madrid conference and the subsequent
negotiations witnessed extensive and fruitful talks between academics,
activists and semi-officials on a non-official level. The current period
seems to be a similar era, increasingly full of meetings, initiatives
and proposals. This not only reflects the failure of the official peace
process, but also reflects feelings of urgency to find a way out of this
violent and confrontational relationship.

The increase in contacts also mirrors developments in public opinion
that have not been reflected in the political behavior of the respective
leaderships. In Israel, polls have been showing discrepancies between
the positions of the Israeli public on issues such as the settlements,
their expansion and the future of a Palestinian state on the one hand,
and Israeli official negotiating positions on those same issues on the
other.

As such, the content of these track II initiatives, whether from the
Palestinian or Israeli side, and the content of the discussions in
non-official meetings and seminars reflect the maturity of the two
respective publics, as well as the remaining gaps. Most non-official
discussions can envision compromise on the territorial issue, more or
less ending the occupation, and on the settlement issue, which is solved
through land swaps. The issue of Jerusalem, however, still needs some
work, but there are creative ideas circulating that show that this issue
is not completely unsolvable. That leaves us with a single, major
sticking point: that of the refugees and right of return. So far, no
track II talks or unofficial deliberations have reflected maturity
towards solving this problem. There has been some progress, but not enough.

That is reason for these unofficial contacts to be encouraged and to
focus on remaining obstacles. In particular, the lion's share of the
obstacles before a refugee solution have resulted from propaganda
exaggerating the position of the Palestinian side in order to ratchet up
Israeli internal political solidarity. Non-official meetings can affect
the public by reducing the subject's taboos, undoing the propaganda and
possibly paving the ground for progress on the official level when it is
time to resume real talks.

Here, however, a warning is due: unofficial track II talks can sometimes
offer a false impression of what is possible according to the yardstick
of public opinion on the other side. One example are declarations by
some Palestinians stating that it is possible to reach an end to the
conflict without solving the refugee problem according to United Nations
Resolution 194. The Palestinian public and leadership is not expected
now or later to consider ending the conflict without solving the refugee
issue according to the above parameters.

Overall, any negotiations breakthrough seems unlikely to happen until
there is a change of composition in the Israeli government and until
this anti-peace process coalition is replaced with a coalition whose
ideology is not entirely incompatible with the notion of land for
peace.

