At some point in the coming months or years, the Israeli-Palestinian
peace process will be renewed, either willingly by the two sides or as a
result of international intervention. Both peoples will either be
represented by leaders who are genuinely interested in peace, or will be
compelled by the international community to make peace. In either case,
in formulating its positions Israel cannot ignore the legacy of a
collapsed peace process and 18 months of armed confrontation. It will
have to adopt an altered set of priorities, based on the lessons it has
drawn. Some may make a settlement more difficult, others more negotiable.

The key concepts are security, separation and enforcement.

The most important lessons regard security. After the experiences of
Lebanon and Intifada II, it should be clear that the most effective
current security threat to Israel (not to be confused with the
non-conventional threats that loom on the horizon) is low level warfare
waged by weak and unstable neighbors using guerilla and terrorist
tactics and relying on regional and international sympathy.

Consequently, alongside Israel's conventional requirements to retain a
capacity to defend itself from the Jordan Valley, maintain early warning
stations in the West Bank, enforce demilitarization and enjoy overflight
rights, it will have to insist on extremely strict security controls at
entry points to Palestine from Jordan and Egypt, in order to interdict
arms smuggling and infiltration. Violations will be met with automatic
international sanctions. And a single, effective Palestinian security
force, working initially under close international supervision, will
replace the current mosaic of competing security bodies, many tainted by
terrorism.

Security concerns also dictate that territorial and settlement issues be
resolved so as to ensure that Israel's borders with Palestine are
defensible at the tactical level, and that settlement annexation does
not mandate the enlargement of Israel's Arab population. We must avoid
situations in which an annexed settlement is vulnerable to attack, or
where annexation of a settlement means including additional Palestinians
within Israeli territory. This may mean annexing fewer rather than more
settlements near the Green Line.

The increasingly dominant separation principle has already prompted some
scholars and strategists to propose that Israel offer Palestine
territorial compensation for annexation by redrawing the West Bank
border to include Israeli Arab towns and villages just inside the Green
Line. This would reflect Israel's growing concerns over the
radicalization of the Israeli Arab community and the threat to Israel as
a Jewish state--threats generated to a considerable extent by the
Palestinian national struggle. However it is not clear whether this
essentially 19th century idea of territorial swaps--settlements in
exchange for Israeli Arab towns--would stand up to the scrutiny of
Israel's High Court of Justice.

There are two negotiating areas where Palestinian positions, as
enunciated over the past 18 months by Yasir Arafat and other officials,
have generated a strong sense of delegitimization among Israelis. The
first concerns Palestinian denial of any Jewish link to the Temple
Mount/Haram a-Sharif, where the current conflict began. Israel must
insist that a renewed process deliver some form of
Palestinian/Arab/Muslim recognition of the Israeli/Jewish religious and
historic heritage on the Temple Mount. But the physical management of
the site can be left to Muslims, within the framework of a full ethnic
divide between Israeli and Palestinian Jerusalem.

The second "delegitimizing" issue is the refugees. Palestinian demands
on this issue appear to constitute the thin end of a wedge intended
eventually to "Palestinize" Israel. Hence we can no longer toy with even
symbolic concessions regarding return, such as offering refugees a
choice between return to Israel and other, seemingly more attractive
alternatives.

There are additional lessons to be drawn that reflect conceptual
failures of the Oslo agreement itself. These have contributed to a
radical decline over the past 18 months in the capacity of Israelis and
Palestinians to communicate and resolve their differences based on a
shared peace "vocabulary." Thus, Israel and Palestine must now commit to
compulsory arbitration of certain inevitable disagreements, rather than
allowing their conflicting interpretations of agreements to destroy the
process. And they must accept an international enforcement presence to
ensure that refusalists on both sides do not sabotage agreements.

The Oslo concept of close Israeli-Palestinian economic cooperation,
which has been rendered largely inoperative by Israeli security
concerns, will also have to be radically revised if Palestine is to have
a chance to prosper. This will probably mean reduced Palestinian
dependency on the Israeli economy, within the framework of overall
separation.

Perhaps most challenging of all is the need to recognize that the
parameters of United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 have proven
insufficient for Israeli-Palestinian peacemaking. They don't deal at all
with refugees and Jerusalem, and their territorial stipulations are
subject to conflicting interpretations. Here there is room for guarded
optimism. Arab League ratification of the Saudi proposal in Beirut in
March 2002 reflects apparent recognition of this dilemma. Taken
together, 242, the Saudi proposal and the Clinton principles of December
2000 provide a positive basis for formulating an improved new foundation
for Israeli-Palestinian negotiations that embodies the lessons learned
from a year and a half of fighting.

