I recently heard Minister of Negotiations Affairs Saeb Erekat say that
even if the Palestinian government consisted of Mother Teresa, Mahatma
Gandhi and Nelson Mandela, Israel would still claim it was not up to
scratch. Many Palestinians would agree with the statement. The majority
of Palestinians experience Israeli aggressions on a daily basis and have
not seen any evidence of good intentions from the Israeli side. To them,
Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is not a man of peace.

To Israelis, late President Yasser Arafat was the "obstacle to peace,"
and since Arafat passed away the Israeli media has been full of comments
and articles that consider this a great opportunity for peace. But only
a week after Arafat's death, Sharon found another obstacle. On November
18, Sharon said that before negotiations could be resumed, successors to
Arafat should put an end to incitement against Israelis in the
Palestinian media and in the Palestinian curriculum. This is a very
complicated condition to fulfill, mainly because it simply isn't true.

In 2000, a group called "Jews for Truth Now" accused Palestinians of
incitement against Israel in the Palestinian school curriculum. The
group claimed that a Palestinian textbook entitled "Our Country
Palestine" teaches Palestinian 6th graders that Israel should be
destroyed. The group advertised this in Haaretz newspaper, in the US and
other countries. Khalil Mahshi, then General Director of International
and Public Relations at the Ministry of Education, investigated the
matter and found that the reference supposedly in that book did not
exist. Nevertheless, the advertisement found an unquestioning audience.
The Center for Monitoring the Impact of Peace, an American
non-governmental organization, reprinted the accusation and published a
report that was translated into different languages. As a result, two
main funding sources for developing Palestinian curricula were ended,
one from Italy and another from the World Bank.

Meanwhile, a 1998 study of 124 Israeli textbooks by Professor Daniel
Bar-Tal, Tel Aviv University, which found that Arabs were consistently
described as "hostile, deviant, cruel, immoral, unfair, and as having
the intention to hurt Jews", did not receive any kind of attention.

Textbooks aside, the issue that always seems to escape the attention in
this kind of discussion is what's happening on the ground. As an
occupying force that on a daily basis engages in practices humiliating
to Palestinians, Israel is inciting against itself. Israel is denying
basic human rights to Palestinians, and Palestinian resistance is
inevitable. Most Palestinians are not prejudiced against Israelis and
Palestinians do realize that not all Israelis are soldiers. There are
hundreds of Israelis who support Palestinians in their struggle and work
on activities to stop the Israeli aggression against Palestinians.
Israeli peace activists are always welcomed by Palestinians and received
in their homes.

The Palestinian majority realizes that the Israeli public is polarized
and does not know the reality of daily Palestinian suffering.
Palestinians believe the Israeli public is deceived by Israeli
propaganda. I often hear comments that Israel is not genuine about
implementing peace. I also hear Palestinians talking about steadfastness
and struggle. The majority believes in a two-state solution and in a
just peace for both peoples. There is a consensus, but, like in any
society, it is not total. There are also Israelis on TV calling for
death to Palestinians, and there were Israeli cabinet ministers calling
for the assassination of Arafat, the elected president. But, it seems,
for Sharon, Palestinians are not supposed to consider Israel an
occupying force but a defensive one. Sharon seems to want Palestinians
to stop calling his forces "occupation forces."

I lecture in psychology at Birzeit University and I usually do not
discuss politics with my students. But it is inevitable that they tell
me about their travails at Israeli checkpoints, especially when they are
late. And this is the least of the aggression, where common practices
include assassination, house demolitions and land leveling. Are these
not tools of incitement? Are we supposed to teach our children that the
Israeli aggression is for our benefit? Are we expected to meet Israeli
soldiers with flowers to set a good example for our children?

During the first intifada, the Israeli government closed down most
schools and universities. How, then, did Palestinian children learn to
throw stones? The presence of the Israeli army taught them this. At
present, Palestinians suffer more than ever from the Israeli occupation,
an occupation that is illegal by any standard. Recent pictures of
Israeli soldiers violating dead Palestinian bodies, published in Yedioth
Aharonot, are further evidence of the dehumanizing practices of an
Israeli occupying force that operates from a position of unchallenged
power.

The main questions now are: what does Sharon mean by incitement? Who
defines what incitement is? Is incitement something that is only engaged
in by the occupied? The Palestinian Authority should address these
questions and refer to international law for a precise definition.
Meanwhile, the international community must be balanced in monitoring
incitement, but most importantly, should focus on achieving
self-determination for Palestinians. There cannot be security for Israel
without guaranteeing Palestinians their human rights and ending the
greatest incitement of all, the Israeli occupation.

