Incitement against Israel and Jews in the Palestinian media and
educational system is one of a number of serious issues that divide the
two sides and fuel hostility. The critical question is, how much weight
should be assigned to incitement in Israeli policy-making. Does it make
sense, for example, for Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to declare
that the renewal of a political process between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority is no longer dependent on an end to violence, but
rather on an end to Palestinian incitement? Is it then any more logical
for Palestinian Prime Minister Ahmed Qurei (Abu Ala) to declare that
first Israel has to stop its own incitement?

In the course of some ten years since the Palestinian Authority was
founded, committees have been established and studies commissioned to
look into the issue of incitement. The PA has introduced new textbooks
that contain less incitement toward Israel than their Egyptian and
Jordanian predecessors. Controversies have blossomed over the meaning of
"jihad" as a Palestinian educational value and the absence of "Israel"
on maps in Palestinian geography textbooks. Palestinian official media
have carried programs that appear to condone or encourage suicide
bombings. Some Israeli critics argue that the very publication of the
Palestinian narrative, according to which Israel's existence is based on
a crime perpetrated against the Palestinian people, constitutes incitement.

No doubt, Palestinians have indeed incited viciously against Israelis.
But before we in Israel turn Palestinian incitement into a casus belli,
we need to search our own public space, along with the history of our
attempts at peacemaking with our other Arab neighbors, in an effort to
establish a measure of proportionality. The paradoxes and contradictions
are disturbing.

First of all, against the backdrop of PM Sharon's disengagement plan
there is currently no lack of incitement in our own society. Settler
rabbis who receive government salaries make hateful proclamations, and
encourage violence against Arabs and Jews alike (at least, one might
note tongue in cheek, they're as prejudiced against fellow Israeli Jews
as against Palestinian Arabs). To the chagrin of many Israelis, our
legal establishment tells us that these hate-mongers generally enjoy the
protection of Israel's freedom of speech laws. How, then, can we
criticize the Palestinians at one and the same time for not developing a
democracy and for condoning incitement?

Palestinians also point to Israeli settlement expansion and military
actions that kill and maim non-combatants as the equivalent of
incitement--or worse. In other words, they refuse to isolate incitement
from the rest of the conflict. They note that it is virtually impossible
to find the borders of the Palestinian Authority, not to mention the
green line, in official Israeli publications. Just look at the weather
maps on Israeli television and in our most serious newspapers to see how
easily and hurtfully we make the Palestinian Authority disappear from
our daily routines.

Turning to our other neighbors, the scope and depth of incitement in
Egyptian and Jordanian textbooks and media is worse than in Palestine.
Yet we negotiated peace treaties with these countries without demanding
that they address these issues, and since then we suffice with ritual
protests by Israeli diplomats and American Jewish organizations.

Syrian incitement is the worst. Yet PM Sharon doesn't mention incitement
when he lays out the conditions that must be satisfied in order for
Israel to agree to renew peace negotiations with Syria. Instead he
demands that Syria dismantle the terrorist infrastructure (Hizballah,
Hamas, Islamic Jihad) under its auspices. Then he turns and presents
conditions for renewing a peace process with the Palestinians that are
the complete antithesis: we'll ignore your terrorist infrastructure for
the moment, but stop the incitement! Our Arab neighbors may be forgiven
if they interpret these blatant inconsistencies in our incitement policy
as reflecting little more than a generalized attempt by Sharon to avoid
serious peace negotiations with any of them.

We have every right--indeed, an obligation--to make an issue of
Palestinian incitement. But where is the broader context? In looking at
Egypt and Jordan we recognize that anti-Israel and anti-Jewish
incitement will continue to fester among our neighbors long after peace,
because it reflects both the way their societies see us and the
standards of civility they apply to themselves. Yet this is not a reason
to avoid or postpone making peace. Certainly few if any Israelis regret
the peace with Jordan and Egypt, even though their media and school
curricula still incite against us.

On the contrary, in the long term it is precisely in order to reduce
this incitement that we must strive for peace with our neighbors,
especially the Palestinians.

