I was apprehensive all night as the TV satellite reception was
dysfunctional, a usual sign of Israeli spy drones invading our skies
when they are on their way to prepare a kill.

At 5:20 am, I was awakened by the thundering noise of the low flying
F16, another sign of the Israelis closing in on a target. Five minutes
later I heard a distant explosion and the local Palestinian TV station,
the only available source of news, announced the assassination of Sheikh
Ahmad Yassin, the spiritual leader of Hamas.

Immediately, Gaza was sealed off by the Israel Defense Forces, as was
the West Bank--a prison locked. The skies filled with dark clouds of
smoke as burning tires suddenly appeared in every corner. Tens of
thousands gathered in the streets demanding revenge as the funeral
procession of Yassin made its way to the cemetery. Gaza had never been
this way before. Every man and woman was shaken with apprehension of
what will come next.

The killing of Yassin was not surprising. Israeli officials recently
declared that everyone, including the leaders of militant groups, is a
legitimate target. It was obvious that Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon was incensed by the suicide bombing in Ashdod, not only because a
number of Israelis were killed, but because it proved that infiltration
inside Israel remains possible in defiance of the notorious wall Israel
has constructed and all of its other security measures.

Indeed, this whole story can be viewed as another form of the tribal
revenge and retaliation that has continued for more than three years.
Politicians and commentators are declaring that Sharon is mad and that
by killing Yassin, he is throwing the whole area, if not the world, into
chaos. But I don't think Sharon is mad or acting in retaliation. He has
a plan, and it is working.

Sharon has succeeded in turning the clock back, destroying the Oslo
agreement and the Palestinian Authority as a partner. Sharon has decided
that peace is a mortal danger to Israel because it entails giving up the
land in the West Bank. More seriously, Sharon is determined to kill the
dream of the "loony left" of a binational state. He is ready to
sacrifice even more Jews to stop it. Violation of international law is
unimportant and the number of Palestinians murdered is of no
consequence. Yassin is just another number on Sharon's list; there will
be many to follow.

The killing of Yassin may well be one of the final nails in the coffin
of the Palestinian Authority, after Sharon has meticulously carved it
piece by piece into nothing. Not only intent on destroying the
Authority, Sharon is all the more determined to kill any future
partner--including Hamas.

Interestingly, Yassin once accepted an end to the conflict, one that
included a Palestinian state next to Israel, and thus abandoned the
dream of an Islamic state in historic Palestine. His main target was to
end the Israeli occupation. It is important to remember that Hamas and
all forms of resistance were born out of the Israeli occupation.

Last summer Yassin was instrumental in bringing to bear a unilateral
ceasefire that held for nearly two months. Yassin was much-respected.
His killing has elevated him to the level of sainthood, to a powerful
model of martyrdom.

In the aftermath of Yassin's murder, Hamas could credibly strengthen its
hold and assume the leadership in Palestine as President Yasser Arafat's
Authority has degenerated into a symbol of humiliation and impotence.
This was ingeniously executed by Sharon, helped--no doubt--by the
Palestinian lack of leadership and vision, and at times assisted by
blessings from the White House.

The killing of Sheikh Yassin in his wheelchair outside a mosque
following the dawn prayer will not make Israel a safer place. It may
temporarily offer Sharon safety in his position as he embarks on a new
level of violence that will in turn make Hamas more popular and more
militant and Israelis more frightened. Tragically, the logic of terror
has played out very well for Sharon, while helping the Bush Corporation.
Sharon desperately needs a Palestinian retaliation that will strengthen
his hand against his domestic foes.

But it may all go wrong for Sharon and Bush alike as the truth
shockingly becomes more apparent, and were the new leadership of Hamas
to consider a dramatic change of course. It is not an impossibility to
imagine new Gaza Hamas leader Abdel Aziz Rantisi on the screen telling
Israelis that he opposes more corpses and wants a just peace--telling
them that, indeed, revenge is not his game.

In the killing of Yassin, only the death camp can rejoice. But this will
be short-lived, as life always wins in the end. This is the lesson of
history.

