It is tempting--in view of the coincidence of the third anniversary of
the al Aqsa intifada, the tenth anniversary of the Oslo accords, the
30th anniversary of the outbreak of the Yom Kippur War and the 25th
anniversary of the Camp David accords
                                             that led to
Israeli-Egyptian peace--to compare two Israel-Arab conflicts and their
outcomes. Will the effect of hundreds of dead, thousands of disabled and
billions of dollars that the Israeli public has been paying out since
October 2000, ultimately resemble that of the October 1973 trauma? (I'll
leave the questions regarding the Palestinian balance to my Palestinian
colleagues.) What has to happen in order for Israelis to reach the
conclusion that on the eastern front, like on the southern front,
political accommodation with a neighbor offers a better guarantee of
security than disputed territories, and that a peace that resembles
non-belligerency is better than any kind of war?

It is argued that there is no room to compare the open spaces of Sinai
and the Egyptian border, far from the nearest Israeli settlement, with
the West Bank and Gaza Strip border, located within primitive mortar
range of central Israel. Some say that a peace agreement with a stable
and orderly Arab state like Egypt in no way even resembles an agreement
with a Palestinian organization that hasn't decided whether or not it
really wants to become a stable and orderly country. They argue that
while Egypt concluded that it could not defeat Israel, there are still
Palestinian leaders who believe that terrorism can win the struggle
against Israel.

The conclusion drawn from an analysis of these distinctions is that
Israel cannot permit itself in the foreseeable future to give up
strategic territories in the West Bank and Gaza--a conclusion only
confirmed by the abortive attempt, in the course of the 1991 Madrid
process and the 1993 Oslo agreement
                                           , to abandon military
solutions in favor of a political option. After Ehud Barak persuaded
them that the Palestinians rejected his "generous offer", Israelis have
blocked their minds to the argument that terrorist attacks in Tel Aviv
are a response to the occupation of Hebron.

But in order for this comparison to be complete, we must address the
time factor. Imagine that Egyptian President Anwar Sadat had waited
another quarter of a century before coming to Jerusalem to offer full
peace in return for all the territories conquered by Israel from Egypt.
Imagine that instead of 6,000 settlers who had moved to Sinai during the
ten years between 1967 and Sadat's historic visit, there were 230,000
Jews in Sinai, who had settled the region in the course of 36 years
since the Six Day War. Would the Sharon-Lieberman-Eitam government
evacuate Yamit, which in due course would have grown into a city like
Maaleh Adummim with tens of thousands of residents? It is certainly
possible that under these circumstances Sadat would never have come to
Jerusalem, and that Israel, burdened with conflict on its eastern flank
and tension on its northern border, would now have to deploy sizeable
contingents in its southern theater as well, to confront a large and
powerful Arab army. And under these circumstances, Jordan would be hard
put to maintain its peace agreement with Israel.

Three years of intifada have opened the eyes of the world, including the
United States, to recognize that, as in the case of the Israeli-Egyptian
(and Israeli-Syrian) conflict, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict also has
two sides: terrorism, and territory. The roadmap
                                                , born of the intifada,
asserts that the lack of symmetry between the murder of children and the
theft of land need not absolve Israel of the obligation to at least
dismantle outposts that it itself has determined are illegal and to
freeze construction in existing settlements. For the time being the
roadmap has reached a dead end due to the Palestinians' difficulty in
dismantling terrorist organizations as if there were no occupation, and
the Israelis' problem with dismantling settlements as if there were no
terrorism.

To extricate themselves from this "catch", the Palestinians must
overcome domestic constraints and start acting unilaterally against
terrorism. Only this will allow domestic and external pressures to force
Israel to respond by acting in the territorial dimension and beginning
to remove settlements. After three years of useless suffering, there are
indications that the Palestinians are beginning to recognize that the
horror and the anger generated among Israelis by terrorism override any
logical consideration with regard to issues like the demographic danger,
economic decline and even damage to quality of life. If these
indications are converted into deeds, then the past three years will not
have been lost, and thousands of victims will not have died in vain.

