In looking around and assessing almost 19 months of Palestinian
resistance to the Israeli occupation, one recognizes that Palestinians
have undergone some important changes (I will refrain from calling these
gains or losses, since the storm has not settled into calm).

One of the most crucial changes among Palestinians is that their peace
euphoria has come to a more rational and rather depressing end. The
strong belief among Palestinians was that Israeli stubbornness and the
hard and endless negotiations were only intended to extract the maximum
from the Palestinian negotiators--we all thought that Israel would be
leaving in the end. This belief proved wrong and we have been forced to
recognize that Israelis are not yet ready for historical compromise, one
similar to the dramatic transformation of South Africa.

I remember how, after the signing of the Oslo accords, my children and I
left our house holding olive branches and waving them in the streets of
Ramallah. I was surprised that day to see an Israeli soldier kick my
son's hands with his boots in anger. I did not understand why. I thought
a soldier like him should have been happy to leave a land not belonging
to him, in which he was obliged to do a "nasty job" against a hostile
population. Many years later, I realized that he was not happy because
he did not want to leave. Perhaps he thought, as many Israelis still do,
that this land must be his.

For me, as for many other Palestinians, the parameters for a real peace
were measured in the size of the nearest settlement to one's house. Is
it shrinking or expanding? The settlement closest to me was continuously
expanding and this meant for me, very simply, that there was no peace,
but only attempts to steal more land. I began to believe that it was
only a question of time until the coming confrontation.

With this in mind, I waited for a Palestinian strategy, one that would
explain to the people what awaits them and how to be prepared. To my
surprise, however, the Palestinian leadership has been silent. Now most
people, including myself, are watching Arab satellite channels, in
particular Al Manar owned by Hezballah, to get some analysis of the
"situation" and to find some direction. I remember in the first months
of what became the "Al Aqsa Intifada," how Palestinians waited to hear
anything from their leadership--clarification describing what is
happening and why it is happening and to what end--to no avail. There
were many symbolic military actions--heavy firing in demonstrations and
the funerals of martyrs, masked people wearing black uniforms and
weighted down with belts of bullets--but after the funerals and
demonstrations, there was nothing else for someone like me to contribute.

I was an active participant in the first uprising, and I have heard many
people say that this uprising is the one that will liberate us. Its
motto has been to "endure all of the pain for one hour, instead of
suffering for many hours." That led me to believe that we would be asked
to do much more than in the first uprising. I thought that the skills
and experience we had gained at mobilizing support from all over the
world would be more enhanced, more organized and more systematic than in
the first uprising. I thought that we would have a clearer message for
and discourse with the Israelis, the Arabs and the rest of the world.
That message should have been that after seven years of waiting and
endless negotiations, what we gained were more settlements, more land
confiscation, more suffocating blockades and humiliation.

My faith that we would be able to send a consistent and powerful message
to the world came out of the fact that now we had our national
institutions, various ministries and long-awaited expertise from the
Diaspora. I thought that if the first uprising succeeded in bringing the
likes of Hanan Ashrawi into the media spotlight, this uprising,
alongside our national institutions, would bring tens or maybe hundreds
of Hanans to face the cunning and sophisticated Israeli propaganda
machine. I thought that more careful civil defense measures would be
taken to protect people's lives and to prepare them for a long
resistance, a resistance inevitable to finally gain their freedom. I
thought that we would see a full-scale strategy to prepare Palestinians
for long sieges and more brutal military "incursions," whether by
preparing shelters, makeshift hospitals, better communications and so
on. None of this happened and instead, I saw chaos.

Wherever you went, national institutions lacked mandate and defined
responsibilities. Everywhere, people were engaged in internal conflicts
and many direly needed service and development projects were aborted
because of those conflicts.

As a member of the public, I felt that we took the role of a passive
audience, while the armed men became the main actors. I have read about
the relationship between civilians and militants in many revolutions.
Most of the literature out there speaks of genuine and productive
relationships. But in our case, the militants, too, were not saying
much. Why the arms? For what purpose? And what is the role of the people
in relation to them? Many questions went without clear answers.

I, like many others, was skeptical over the value of we called
"takhtakhat," or sporadic shootings. But people did embrace and support
well-planned and successful targeted military operations against Israeli
settlers and soldiers. The public was divided concerning suicide attacks
inside Israel, but Israeli brutalities filled many people's hearts with
the desire for revenge. Politically undirected revenge, however, can be
a gift in the lap of one's enemy and I am one of those who believes this
is exactly what happened. We gave a prime minister like Ariel Sharon
with his vast criminal record the chance to shed more Palestinian blood
and to distort the main aim of our struggle of ending the Israeli
occupation.

Yes, we have gained the support of many peoples all over the world. We
have managed to present once again the naked reality on the ground, the
reality of an occupied people under a classic foreign occupation. But we
made great sacrifices and suffered dramatically for this result. Perhaps
that might have been minimized, if we were better organized, if we had
participated in the decisions made, if we were treated as citizens and
not as "clients."

The only way to get closer to our goals of liberty and independence is
to change. In order to defeat our occupiers, we must be empowered as a
people and draw the best from each capable person, attracting the merits
from each individual.

The last Israeli incursion in March 29 has once again put the people on
the right track. It encouraged individual initiative, public solidarity,
heroism and spirit to rid us of this ugly occupation. The only way that
this spirit will stay alive is through real democracy and respect for
initiatives from the people.

