When we set out for the first round of talks in Oslo, on the morning of
January 20, 1993, we did not imagine that this would be the beginning of
a dialogue that, in the course of the ensuing nine months, would turn
into a textbook on track II diplomacy. At the time, we were involved in
diverse track II activities with Palestinians, some of a political
nature and others more academic, dealing with issues like water and the
economy. The need to produce and function in non-official tracks in
order to assist the official political process proved itself in the
course of our work. The advantages of side channels and their capacity
to complement and foster policy led us to the dialogue with the PLO and
the breakthrough of the Oslo agreement.

The primary essence of "track II" is the capacity to bring two sides of
a conflict, each with great knowledge of the issue at stake, each with
its influence and access to decisionmakers and/or influence over the
public, into a dialogue that is unfettered by the constraints of the
official system. Their detachment must reflect the fact that they do not
represent their governments, but to an even greater extent that they are
not subject to political confines and to the anachronistic political
schemes that usually characterize the leadership. At the practical
level, track II must be based on a system of mutual trust and on a high
level of secrecy. Trust and secrecy afford those involved the requisite
flexibility, creativity and unconventional thinking for finding
formulations that advance the official negotiations.

What activated us nearly ten years ago continues to occupy Israelis and
Palestinians these days as well. One can even discover numerous points
of similarity: the dialogue partner was there on both sides, the
government of Israel refused to seriously engage the authentic
representative of the Palestinian people, the outlines of an agreement
were fairly clear, both publics were exhausted and prepared to move
beyond the declarative positions of the two leaderships, the violence on
the ground was producing more and more casualties, lack of trust was
growing, the declining personal security of the populations on both
sides was becoming a matter of routine, closures and the denial of
regular work in Israel were weighing upon the economic situation in the
territories, Israel's international standing was declining, and its
government was countering terrorism with illogical punitive steps like
the exile of Hamas activists to Lebanon.

The current situation is something of a paradox. More than 60 percent of
the Israeli public support reaching a peace agreement on the basis of
what are termed "far-reaching concessions" that could facilitate
permanent status. At the same time more than 60 percent support Prime
Minister Sharon, who is doing all in his power, within the limits of his
office, to prevent any possibility of peace. The Palestinian side
presents a mirror image. There too over 60 percent support reaching
agreement with Israel based on two states for two peoples, separated by
the 1967 borders. There too over 60 percent support ongoing attacks
inside Israel, and there too Yasir Arafat is not a catalyst for peace.

The main reason for this dichotomous situation is that on both sides
trust has been broken, hope is disappearing, and the dominant language
is that of force. Further, in Israel there is a sense--mistaken, in my
opinion--that there is no Palestinian partner for peace, and that there
is no political solution that might be acceptable on the Palestinian
side. The conclusion in Israel, even among many left-wing voters, is
that the Palestinians want to bring about the disappearance of Israel,
whether by violence or through exercise of the right of return to the
Jewish state.

The only way to overcome this substantive obstacle is through the
combination of a cessation of violence, the use of track II contacts,
and reliance on public diplomacy. On the sure assumption that the
current government of Israel is incapable of carrying out this major
step, the task--indeed, perhaps the obligation--falls upon the
substantive actors on both sides. It is they who must try to reach
agreed formulations that might prove to Israelis, Palestinians and the
entire world that there is a plan and there is a partner. In so doing
they will restore hope and accelerate the pace of political change in
Israel.

Accordingly it is not surprising that in recent months we are witness to
more and more activities of this sort. They seek to achieve, through
track II talks, unofficial agreements between Israelis and Palestinians
regarding position papers dealing with principles or even involving
greater detail, along the lines of a complete framework agreement. These
documents must comprise the following principles, otherwise they will
offer no chance of seriously advancing the process: two states for two
peoples on the basis of the 1967 borders; acre for acre territorial
swaps in return for the minimal lands that Israel annexes in East
Jerusalem and the West Bank; the right of return to the demilitarized
Palestinian state alone, with Israel recognizing the suffering caused to
the refugees and participating substantively in a solution to the
problem; partition of Jerusalem into two capitals, based on the
demographic dividing lines; and Palestinian control over Harem a-Sharif
and Israeli control over the Western Wall, while ensuring the religious
and archeological status quo in an Old City open to all.

These efforts have already yielded first fruits. Documents like those of
Ayalon-Nusseibeh and Ziad Abu Zayyad are harbingers. Hints of more
comprehensive documents are not unrealistic. These activities are in
turn spurring international establishments and think tanks to produce
their own position papers regarding solutions based on the papers noted
above. The combination of a realistic permanent status solution adopted
by Israelis and Palestinians of public stature, together with a serious
decline in the level of terrorism and the restoration of a sense of
personal security among the Israeli public, could catalyze the
rebuilding of the Israeli peace camp. If that camp is wise enough to
choose a charismatic leader who adheres to an agenda comprising a peace
effort based on the existing formula, together with social justice and
the generation of economic momentum deriving from diplomatic
success--the peace camp will once again lead the way to an
Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement.

