On its third anniversary, the intifada has been the subject of a great
deal of analyses, articles and essays. A quick review of the writings
that appeared after the first, second and now third year of the uprising
shows that they have many points of agreement, particularly regarding
the intifada's achievements and accomplishments. There is marked
departure, however, in assessing the dangers the Palestinian people now
face.

The gamble made by the Palestinian leadership--and one initially fully
justified--relied on the assumption that escalating Israeli military
measures and aggression reap Arab and international solidarity. But this
is no longer an easy gamble, as matters today appear quite the reverse.
This change is very serious and worthy of our attention; we can neither
ignore it nor let it divert us from the main dispassionate truth of the
Palestinian national struggle, a truth that has been a major factor on
our success thus far.

This truth is that the Palestinian national movement is not like other
liberation movements in circumstance or its source of power. It cannot,
for instance, achieve its goals on its own; the Palestinian people alone
cannot win the quasi-military battle against Israel. Therefore, without
effective external support and energized Arab and international
solidarity backing the intifada, our national movement will remain
stationary, waiting for such assistance.

It is not an exaggeration to say that recent years have altered the
international and regional environment and gradually shifted all levels
of influence in the political process from inside the occupied
territories to outside. This change demands the parallel reinforcement
of political and media energies abroad, particularly in the public
arena, in order to form a broad international front supporting the
Palestinian people's struggle and enabling them to achieve their goal of
terminating the Israeli occupation.

This brings us back to the question, "What has the intifada achieved in
its third year?" What can it achieve under these circumstances, given
the international and regional transformation?

The intifada succeeded in aborting as a solution for the Palestine
question the unjust and incomplete Camp David negotiations, which were
crafted to relinquish Jerusalem and the refugees' right to return, and
to keep settlement blocs and the borders of the Palestinian state under
Israeli control. The intifada also discredited the American ideas that
were offered in the same framework. It succeeded in enhancing commitment
to our national goals and rejuvenating the Palestinian struggle.
Furthermore, it substantiated American bias towards Israel and
reinforced Palestinian national unity between the factions, particularly
in the field. The intifada unmasked Israel's lack of seriousness towards
attaining a just political solution that would fulfill Palestinian
demands, halted an increasing normalization process with Israel, and
refocused international public opinion on the need to find a solution
for the Palestinian question.

Finally, the intifada demonstrated that it is impossible to impose
solutions on the Palestinians by unilaterally changing the facts of the
occupation on the ground (despite that Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon remains convinced of this possibility). The uprising has verified
that there is no room for a dual authority--Palestinian national
authority and the occupation's authority--over one people in this small
geographic area, the occupied territories. There is no way that a
national authority that seeks independence for its people can coexist
with a foreign occupation whose objective is to abolish every pillar of
this independence.

But tracking these events alone do not provide us with a comprehensive
view of what happened and what might happen yet. The Palestinian
intifada cannot, solely on its own, shift from a defensive posture
upholding national rights and demands to a political offensive intended
to reap achievements. Indeed, the intifada has remained almost static
since the close of its first year.

For one, the intifada has not succeeded in becoming an uprising beyond
these borders, as some had wished. To date, it has not succeeded in
mobilizing serious political engagement that has the possibility of
ending the occupation, nor has it been able to use the pressures that do
exist to hasten a just solution. It has not accelerated the rhythm of
Arab solidarity, nor realized the slogans promising an international
investigation committee, nor broken the American monopoly on the
negotiations process. It has not provided international protection, or
even lifted the physical siege imposed on the Palestinian people and
their elected president.

Obviously, these failures are not solely the responsibility of the
intifada, but one cannot ignore what the intifada has reaped in the form
of pressures on the Palestinians. Other factors contributing to these
failures include the elimination of the intifada's public protests and a
shift to armed confrontations, a response forced by violent Israeli
measures when all political options had been curtailed.

Internal, regional and international changes have all played a role in
imposing a political embargo on the intifada. The absence of an
objective reading of these changes by some Palestinian streams that
ignore the importance of external pressure has contributed greatly to
the situation's deterioration.

These changes included the right-wing's control over Israel with Ariel
Sharon as prime minister, and the events of September 11 in the United
States which then led to the so-called "war against terrorism."
Afterwards, the Israeli army invaded all of the Palestinian Authority
areas, and the United States prepared for a war against Iraq and
threatened countries in the region that they must fight terrorism.

Under these circumstances, the Palestinian leadership accepted the
roadmap                                                 . This meant
that the intifada would have begun politically with Palestinian
rejection of the Camp David formula and calls that international law be
implemented, only to end in its third year with acceptance of the
roadmap. The political gap between those two formulas is the best
expression of the bottleneck that now exists, one that is growing
increasingly complex and dangerous considering the recent Israeli
decision to remove President Yasser Arafat.

How then can we exit this situation? It is clear that we can, if we
master reading the changes underway and deal with them rationally and
with farsightedness, without surrendering or subjugating ourselves in
the process. The first step in this direction is to avoid any activity
that might label the Palestinian national struggle as "terrorism". The
second step is to reconsider the intifada's public component, which has
lain dormant for some time, by diverting confrontations with the
occupation to a political arena where the enemy has little room to
maneuver.

Even Benjamin Netanyahu, who now adopts positions more extreme than
those of Ariel Sharon, was compelled as Israeli prime minister--under
international and regional pressure--to accept the Hebron Protocol and
relinquish 13 percent of the West Bank in the Wye agreement. When he was
asked why he changed, he replied, "I did not, but the circumstances did."

Sharon's security conditions and demands that Palestinians dismantle
what he calls the "infrastructure of terrorism" are no different than
the demands of any previous Israeli leader, including Yitzhak Rabin,
Shimon Peres, Benjamin Netanyahu and Ehud Barak. But these leaders from
the left and right never achieved their demands and--because of Arab
pressure and the international climate--gave in on some basic matters in
the transitional agreements. It is /the environment/ that has now
transformed these demands into real pressure on Palestinians and allowed
Sharon to impede political progress while he enjoys the world's sympathy
for his positions.

Even this right-wing government had to change its tack when faced with
resistance to the separation wall. Sharon has since declared that
annexing the Ariel settlement bloc inside the wall requires the right
political environment. This admission proves the importance of
international players--it can still be ill advised to reinforce
occupation with military force. Further confirmation lies in the United
Nations' vote where 133 nations stood opposed to Israel's decision to
remove Arafat.

It /is/ possible to employ efforts that will alter international
positions still more dramatically in favor of the Palestinian people,
their president and their leadership. This external support is an
instrument of pressure that no Israeli government can ignore.

Israel's leftist Labor Party has been in deep crisis since the failure
of its political project at Camp David three years ago. Likewise, the
right-wing Likud will face the same fate when it becomes clear that a
solution of surrender cannot be imposed by military means. Failure of
the Zionist right-wing's policy of force will create an opening for
solving the Palestinian question. This is the task that the intifada
must address in the coming period.

