United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 was passed immediately
after the 1967 war when the rest of historical Palestine--the West Bank
including east Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip--was occupied by Israel. To
this day, UNSCR 242 remains the core of any peace effort or proposal
between Israelis and Arabs in general and Palestinians in particular.

In its preamble, UNSCR 242 starts by reiterating one of the fundamental
premises of international law, namely the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of land by force. It thus goes on to call for the end of the
illegal Israeli occupation of the territories that were taken in 1967.
It also alludes to another significant proponent of the conflict, the
refugees, and calls for a solution to the Palestinian refugee problem.

So, part of the significance of UNSCR 242 is that it deals with the
different components of the conflict, particularly the core aspects,
i.e. occupation, territories, borders and refugees. But the resolution
is significant for another reason: it was unanimously ratified by the
international community. It's very rare to find any resolution regarding
the Palestinian-Israeli conflict that enjoys the support and acceptance
of almost every single country in the world.

Because of the above features of UNSCR 242 it has become a necessary
component in every single initiative, plan or effort that aims at
solving the Israeli-Palestinian problem. UNSCR 338 embodied UNSCR 242.
The initiative behind the Madrid peace conference was based on UNSCR
242. The Oslo agreement was based on UNSCR 242. Since Oslo, you will
find UNSCR 242 in the preamble of every single agreement. Most recently,
the Quartet-sponsored road map, the only game in town right now
concerning the conflict, also included UNSCR 242 as its legal base.

In spite of all this, however, UNSCR 242 has never been implemented and
consequently peace has never been realized. There are several reasons
for this. First among those is that international legality, including
UNSCR 242, has never been respected or taken seriously by Israel, which
depends rather on its military superiority and the support of the United
States.

In addition, the international community never exerted serious,
collective efforts or showed enough political will to support the
negotiations that had UNSCR 242 at their center. This was mainly due to
the insistence of successive US governments to protect Israel and the
Israeli occupation from international legality, something that reflected
negatively on American-Arab relations in general. It also embarrassed
the United States because it exposed double standards in US foreign
policy, particularly evident when Washington called for a solution to
the Iraqi problem during the Saddam Hussein era by enforcing the
relevant UN resolutions on Iraq.

Thirty-seven years after it was passed, UNSCR 242 remains valid as a
basis for a solution to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. In fact, it is
the only way out. If the experience of the past 37 years has taught us
anything, it has taught us that the continuation of the Israeli
occupation is the source of conflict and violence. The only way to
achieve peace, reconciliation and a comprehensive and lasting peace is
to end the occupation that started in 1967 and find a just solution to
the refugee problem exactly as UNSCR 242 stipulated.

