After two years of the current armed conflict between Israel and the
Palestinians, both sides are summing up the lessons learned, and each is
taking stock morally. Israel's assessment holds that the confrontation
was planned in advance with the objective of forcing it to make
concessions. A few months prior to the conflict, an Israeli Intelligence
estimate predicted that the Palestinians would initiate violent
activities if they did not attain their demands through negotiation. In
so doing, the Palestinians withdrew from the commitment, given by
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat in his letter to Prime Minister Yitzhak
Rabin, not to use violence to obtain political objectives.

Just as the Palestinian side incorrectly assessed Israeli society and
its reactions, so too the Israeli side failed to understand the serious
internal pressures under which the Palestinian population labored after
the Oslo agreements: its economic situation deteriorated despite the
agreements, while it interpreted the expansion of Israeli settlements as
the intensification of Israeli occupation. One way or another, Arafat's
great mistake was in not stopping the military conflict at a relatively
early stage.

On the Israeli side, the overriding consideration was the decision in
principle that under no circumstances would it offer concessions as a
consequence of the use of terrorism and violence against it. If
substantive concessions were to be made--then only at the negotiating
table. Israel has held to this position successfully, with the backing
of its public, most of which has for some time favored the establishment
of a Palestinian state alongside Israel.

The primary Palestinian objective is understood to be the desire to
cause maximum civilian casualties, particularly within the Green Line.
Two years after the outbreak of violence the number of Israeli dead
exceeds 600, most of them civilians rather than soldiers. It is this
fact that has most influenced Israeli public opinion and brought about a
change in the political views of Israeli society, weakening the Israeli
"peace camp" and reducing the chances that the Labor Party will return
to power in the foreseeable future.

An additional Palestinian objective was to bring about the
internationalization of the conflict, and to cause international forces
to be deployed in the territories while the conflict rages. While this
proposal was raised repeatedly in the United Nations, it was thwarted. A
further Palestinian goal in Israeli eyes was the effort to generate
active involvement, including a military threat, by Arab states.
Although Egypt removed its ambassador at an early stage of the
confrontation, the conflict never spilled across the border, even when
the Palestinian Authority was reoccupied. Nor was a "second front"
opened by Hizballah along Israel's northern border. In a number of Arab
countries, the leadership perceived Arafat as the party jeopardizing
regional stability. One reflection of this approach is the Saudi
initiative, which can be read as a signal to Arafat that the Arab states
cannot wait forever for him to produce a peace initiative; hence they
are bypassing him with their own proposal.

While the concept of "Israeli occupation" has penetrated international
opinion, the Palestinians failed to persuade the world public that
murderous terrorist acts against civilians are justified. Their failure
was particularly evident after 9/11. Arafat's standing in Washington
totally collapsed. Israel was able to show that the steps he took to
prevent terrorism were at best cosmetic and tactical. The failure of the
Zinni and Tenet missions due to vicious terrorist attacks inside Israel
persuaded Washington of the justice of Israel's argument. The US also
accepted that Arafat was personally linked to the Iranian arms ship
Karine A. When Washington declared that it rejects contact with him and
expects him to be replaced by a leadership that will resume
negotiations, this was a personal strategic failure on Arafat's part.

Israel has twice besieged Arafat in his headquarters in Ramallah. This
was a mistake, for in so doing Israel managed to refocus attention on
Arafat and in fact delay reforms within the Palestinian Authority. Here
it is important to note that the demand for reforms and for transparency
in the Palestinian Authority is supported by the European Union. In this
sense there is a very widespread perception that the administration of
the PA is dysfunctional.

The American turnabout is particularly striking in that it touches on
the military sphere as well. Compare the angry American reaction on
April 16, 2001, when an Israeli force penetrated Beit Hanun in the Gaza
Strip and intended to remain there for the night, to Washington's
silence when the IDF initiated two far-reaching operations in the West
Bank--in April-May 2002, when it entered the refugee camps, and in June
when in effect most of Area A was occupied. One can only conclude that
the US has in effect given Israel a free hand to take major military
steps in its war against Palestinian terrorism. This is a net
achievement for Israel, if it exploits it for a political initiative.

If causing damage to Israel can be considered a success, then the
Palestinians registered achievements. First and foremost is the damage
embodied in the crisis generated between Israel and its Arab minority.
Here the Palestinians succeeded in expanding the military conflict to
include elements that were not actively involved previously. Scores of
Israeli Arabs have been apprehended for involvement in serious acts of
terrorism. The damage will inevitably influence Israel's position
regarding a variety of issues. For one, there is a far deeper perception
that Arafat intends to destabilize Israel from within, and that the
struggle is over the existence of the state of Israel. The immediate
reaction is Israel's tough rejection of proposals that any Palestinian
refugees return to Israeli territory.

These developments have also influenced the idea of a separation fence
along the border. The settlers reject the idea, insofar as they
interpret this as leaving them "beyond the fence;" but public pressures
to take unilateral steps continue to grow. The separation fence projects
a negative psychological connotation in that it constitutes a statement
by the Israeli public that it has lost hope in reaching agreements with
the Palestinians. The overall psychological import is, in non-diplomatic
terms: we don't want you in our midst. Better to bring guest workers
from all over the world, rather than risk acts of terrorism on our
territory. This can hardly be considered an achievement by Arafat. In
general, the Palestinians cannot claim that the armed conflict they
initiated improved their chances for realizing their aspiration to
establish a viable Palestinian state.

In Israel there is an understanding of the natural limitations of
military force with regard to conflicts in which ethnic and religious
elements predominate. A decisive military victory cannot be attained in
such a war. For example Israel, like others, has no military solution
for suicide terrorism. Moreover, Israel's operational achievements
clearly do not have a life of their own, especially if they are not
exploited for political initiatives. Since the Sharon government took
over, Israel has no genuine, comprehensive political initiative, just as
the Palestinians lack such a genuine political plan. Hence the current
conflict is not over. Additional chapters await us.

