Q: Can you explain why the ceasefire or hudna declared this
week by the Palestinian factions is important?

A: I think that many changes have happened in the region in this
period and all of the Palestinian factions have focused on these
changes. We want to make a serious decision to prevent disaster in the
area. There is a need to give an opportunity to the new Palestinian
government and to take the Palestinian people into a new stage.

Q: When you say disaster, what are you referring to? Were
their specific threats made?

A: Israel has destroyed our institutions, our cities and towns,
and continues with its aggression against our people. I think that the
resistance from the Palestinian people has succeeded in the face of this
difficult aggression, but we now have many problems. We tried to think
about our people and the difficulties they are facing on the ground. We
think that the hudna will offer an opportunity for our people to stay
powerful and continue the Palestinian struggle in a different way, [in
order] to achieve Palestinian rights.

Q: Is your faction Fateh unified in the hudna?

A: All of the Palestinian factions accepted the concept of the
hudna, but there were some differences about how to talk about it, how
to have one unified text talking about the hudna.

Q: Are you worried that the hudna might not work?

A: I am worried about the Israeli side. I have many suspicions
that the Israeli side will [not] react positively. The comments of the
Israeli side are not encouraging us and I think that the responsibility
now lies with the international community to put pressure on the Israeli
side and convince them or force them to accept the hudna and respond in
a positive way, which means to accept the prerequisites of the hudna.

Q: So you have no assurances really that Israel will
reciprocate?

A: We didn't get any guarantees, but the US did make a statement
saying that the hudna is "a step in the right direction." That is
important at this stage, but we are still waiting for more serious steps
pressuring the Israeli side. They [the US] asked us to give an
opportunity to the political track. The Palestinian leadership, the
Palestinian cabinet and the Palestinian people have answered positively
all the requests made of them. Now the pressure on the Israeli side has
to begin.

Q: US President George W. Bush has been very clear that,
while he supports a hudna, in the end the Palestinian Authority must
disarm the different factions.

A: During the negotiations in Aqaba, President Bush mentioned
this and [Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas] Abu Mazen was clear
in this meeting, telling him that he did not want confrontations among
the Palestinian people and didn't /need/ confrontation among the
Palestinian people. The hudna is a positive way to solve our problems
with each other and give the political track a chance.

President Bush accepted the idea and asked the prime minister to move
towards the hudna and implement a peace. Now the Palestinian people have
succeeded and it is time for the international community to implement
its part.

Q: Might the Fatah hudna extend longer than six months, if
things are moving forward?

A: If the Israeli side and the international community respond
positively to the hudna and we see changes on the ground, and the
Israeli side withdraws from all Palestinian cities and towns and we
return to the political track, then we will continue in the hudna. The
hudna is a set period at this stage, but it will be more sustainable if
we succeed in moving towards our aims.

Q: Do you think that the Palestinian people believe that
the hudna will improve their lives?

A: It depends. I think that the Palestinian people need a change.
We want to exit this situation, but under fair circumstances. We want to
see our people free and moving towards independence; we want to see the
internal and external siege lifted from Palestinian territory; we want
to see the siege lifted from the Palestinian leadership; we want to see
our prisoners out of Israeli jails, we want to see the end to the
Israeli assassination policy and move towards a new future. If people
see something changing on the ground, their confidence in the hudna will
increase and the people will be more committed to it. But if the
Israelis continue their aggression and their policies against our
people, rejecting implementation of their part of this hudna, then it
cannot continue.

