United Nations Security Council Resolution 242 once seemed to promise
Palestine a future. By emphasizing "the inadmissibility of the
acquisition of territory by war," it rejected Israeli claims to the West
Bank including east Jerusalem and the Gaza Strip. And by reaffirming the
need for a "just and lasting peace"--including "a just settlement to the
refugee problem"--Palestine and her children seemed finally slated to
receive a viaticum of justice. But now, nearly 37 years later, Palestine
conjures up an ever-impossible dream and UNSCR 242 might actually renege
on its pledge of partial self-determination and justice.

Originally, UNSCR 242 represented as much victory as it did defeat. Five
months before its passage, Israel had ravished the remains of Palestine
in the Six-Day War, and ever since, the Palestinians there who had not
been killed or displaced by Israel were forced to live under military
occupation. Already, Israel had outraged the international community by
de facto annexing East Jerusalem, and already, extremist Zionists sought
to realize their dreams of replacing the indigenous Christian and Muslim
communities of "Judea and Samaria" (the West Bank) and Gaza with Jewish
immigrants.

UNSCR 242, however, reminded Israel and the world that the Palestinians
are people--they have rights and their historical and cultural
connections to their land should not be negated by any other. It
inspired hope among Palestinians as well as in the Arab world. Finally,
it seemed, the international community--which bore no small measure of
culpability for the conflict--had decided to assume some responsibility
for its vagaries and would ensure Israel's compliance with the law.

By the 1980s, UNSCR 242 became the clarion call for some Palestinian and
Israeli activists. Not only did it sanctify the ideal of Israel and
Palestine, living side by side in peace and security, it also charted a
path: Israel would withdraw from territories it seized in the 1967 War,
millions of Palestinian refugees would finally gain control over their
lives and be compensated for their losses, and the details of
cooperation and coexistence could presumably be negotiated, with
international support.

But for all the high-minded ideals and promise that UNSCR 242 held, many
Palestinians struggled in its celebration. Israel's independence less
than 20 years earlier had seen the loss of 78% of historic Palestine and
the expulsion of two-thirds of its indigenous Christian and Muslim
population. Accepting UNSCR 242 seemed to mean accepting that Palestine,
as a place where all her historic communities could live together, could
only exist in the remaining 22%. Further, UNSCR 242 could have been read
to prejudice many other basic claims as well. For example, although it
rearticulated the foundational principle of the post-World War II order
that territory may never be acquired by force, it only spoke of
"territories occupied in the recent conflict," and not territories
acquired by force in Israel's War of Independence, such as the 23% of
historic Palestine that Israel had seized in excess of the General
Assembly's partition recommendation.

Nevertheless, the Palestinian leadership did make the historic
compromise of accepting UNSCR 242--which, once Israel putatively
accepted it, served as the basis for the now-eviscerated Oslo peace
process. UNSCR 242 seemed to guarantee Palestinian refugees the same
package of rights that was accorded all other refugees under
international law. Forcing the refugees to subsist in squalor for
decades was not their choice to make, the leadership reasoned, and a
peace--even if not the ideal peace of a secular state of Palestine in
all of historic Palestine with equal rights and opportunities for
all--would be good for all involved. The Palestinian leadership had
determined that a Palestine in part of Palestine was better than no
Palestine at all.

That concession, however, bore very little in the way of fruit. While it
did eventually pave the way for limited autonomy in some Palestinian
population centers, the occupation persists and the refugees' redemption
is but a rallying cry of a nation almost defeated. In fact, Israel has
stepped up its conquest of Palestinian territory, erecting a wall to
both shield its illegal colonies and stake out more territory.
Palestinians are literally being encaged and entire villages and
communities are fading into the unforgiving shadows of history. Far from
ushering in a new era of two states living side by side in peace and
security, UNSCR 242 has only seen one state ravenously devour any
prospects for the future of another.

In fact, UNSCR 242 might actually serve as one of the chief rhetorical
weapons in the destruction of the two-state solution, if it hasn't
already. At its heart, UNSCR 242 is about boundaries and lines. The
boundaries and lines that UNSCR 242 suggests sketch the territorial
basis of the two-state solution. It says that Israel may not forcibly
acquire territory beyond the Green Line; and that security and
recognition should be accorded all states in the region, not just Israel.

Israeli politicians, however, routinely bastardize the language of UNSCR
242 to justify realities and practices entirely outside of its purview.
Although the language and drafting history of UNSCR 242 clearly
demonstrates that its intent was not to sanction Israeli conquest of
Palestine's remains, "pro-Israeli" politicians and polemicists bully its
words to support Israeli settlement activity. Obviously, this activity
threatens to destroy any possibility of a Palestinian state, much less
the minimum guaranteed by UNSCR 242. Already, Israel's colonies have
fragmented the West Bank, including East Jerusalem. The Israeli human
rights organization B'tselem reports that Israel's colonies have
incorporated nearly 42% of the West Bank into their jurisdictional
boundaries. And the remaining 58% of the 21% of historic Palestine more
closely resembles the scattered shards of a broken vase than any
state-in-the-making. By perverting the language and intent of UNSCR 242
to accept this activity, these "Israeli advocates" blur the lines that
formed the basis of the resolution, rattling the very foundation of the
two-state solution.

And there's one added irony: Just as UNSCR 242 represented the
international community assuming responsibility for a problem that it
created, it may also become emblematic of the international community's
ambivalence. The Palestinians claim the weight of international law--not
just UNSCR 242, but also General Assembly resolution 194, and the recent
ruling of the International Court of Justice, as well as international
customs and treaties. Israel, however, has thumbed its nose at
international law and the international community by consistently and
fragrantly violating this body of principles. And the international
community has acquiesced, all the while paying lip service to UNSCR
242's increasingly improbable promise.

So perhaps UNSCR 242's Palestine has come and gone. Perhaps the
moderates have acquiesced to the zealots. Perhaps Palestine's only hope
lies in her original image of one secular, democratic state, with equal
rights for all, regardless of ethnicity or religion. But this much is
certain: Since UNSCR 242, only empty promises and continued suffering
have visited the Palestinian people. Perhaps now, it's high time for the
international community to live up to its cant while it still can.

