One way to examine the lessons Israel has--or should have--drawn from
two years of conflict with the Palestinians, is to examine events from
the standpoint of the relevant leaders.

In retrospect, former Prime Minister Ehud Barak appears to have been
correct in asserting that his strategy of negotiations forced
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat to reveal his true intentions, and that
these, particularly regarding the right of return and Temple Mount
issues, were inimical to genuine coexistence with Israel. Barak also
warned, with some prescience, that the alternative to a collapsed peace
process would be, for Israel, the option of unilateral separation--an
option that is increasingly attractive to Israelis who see no near term
likelihood of a negotiated agreement, and which in fact constitutes the
most significant political fallout inside Israel from the current conflict.

Since Barak's departure from power in early 2001 the conflict can be
characterized as one in which none of the three relevant
leaders--Arafat, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, and United States
President George W. Bush--has a realistic strategy for peace.

This does not necessarily mean that Arafat had, or has, a strategy for
prolonged war, or that he intended to begin the conflict on September
28, 2000. While many in Israel believe this to be true, there is also a
persuasive Palestinian analysis that holds that Arafat really has no
strategy at all, and is instead guided largely by events over which he
has little control. Certainly the Palestinians have a very different
narrative regarding the way this conflict began.

Undoubtedly, though, the Palestinians did prepare for armed struggle
with Israel. This was and is their most significant mistake: they
continue to believe in both the necessity and the efficacy of
maintaining an armed force designed, at some level, to fight and deter
Israel. And Arafat continues to believe that violence will advance his
cause. This constitutes a gross Palestinian misreading of the real
balance of forces between the two sides, and of the geostrategic
conditions under which Palestinians could conceivably achieve statehood
in the future.

Israel's first reaction to its perception of calculated Palestinian
aggression was to define its war aims in terms of thwarting the
Palestinian objectives as it understood them: "internationalizing" and
"Arabizing" the conflict, and bringing about Israeli concessions due to
civilian casualties. In this Israel has succeeded. But with his election
in February 2001, Sharon quietly introduced a far more expansive set of
objectives, based on his own long-term reading of Israel's relationship
with the region: Israel must end the conflict by force of arms, which is
the only language the Arabs understand, thereby sending a clear
deterrent message that nothing will be achieved by force; Israel must
delegitimize the current Palestinian leadership, then manipulate the
residual leadership structure toward its own ends; Israel must regain
and maintain physical control over the West Bank and Gaza, by means of
armed force and expansion of settlements. In this way, ultimately the
Palestinians will be forced to settle for far less than Barak's offer,
which they rejected.

Sharon has temporarily and partially realized these aims. Using a
masterful combination of caution and political maneuvering, coupled with
the endless and monstrous provocations provided by Arafat, Sharon has
ensured the support of the US and the Israeli public and the effective
neutrality of much of the Arab world. In this sense he has been more
successful thus far than in his previous attempts at conquest and
manipulation, with the Village Leagues in 1981 and in Lebanon in 1982.
He appears to enjoy the unwitting complicity of key elements in the
Israeli security/intelligence establishment who continue to provide him
mainly with the self-fulfilling assessments that he apparently wants to
hear. He has been lucky, too: the events of 9/11 led the American
leadership to crystallize a view that placed a seemingly willing Arafat
among the forces of evil.

All other things being equal, this leaves us with one of two prospects.
If Sharon's strategy succeeds, we and the Palestinians are doomed to
live an increasingly "South African" reality, in which the two
populations, thanks to the settlements that Sharon champions, are
hopelessly mixed, while the Palestinians soon become a majority and seek
"one man, one vote" rather than a two state solution. If Sharon's
strategy fails--and this is the more likely outcome, insofar as force
alone cannot end a conflict that revolves around so many complex local,
regional and even global territorial and political issues--then we are
bound at some point to resume negotiations.

In returning to negotiations Israel should present positions based on
lessons drawn from its analysis of Arafat's objectives, the failure of
the Oslo track, and two years of violence: stronger security
arrangements inside a Palestinian state and along the future borders of
Palestine with the Arab world to prevent illicit production and
smuggling of arms; border alterations that attach to Israel only
settlements that are defensible and that possibly attach to Palestine
towns inside Israel where the Arab population is increasingly hostile
toward the Jewish state; an "end of conflict" agreement that embodies,
at least at the declarative level, Palestinian acknowledgement of
Israel's legitimacy as a Jewish state; and, in this spirit, no right of
return to Israel for any Palestinian refugees.

But in the Middle East, of course, all other things are not equal. We
may soon be confronted with an American military campaign in Iraq that
could have far-reaching consequences for the current Israeli-Palestinian
conflict--for better or for worse. The countdown toward Iraq is already
constraining Israeli military activities: witness the lifting of the
siege of Arafat's headquarters on September 29.

