Here is a preliminary guide for the perplexed observer of recent days'
"hudna" events in Israel/Palestine. So preliminary that it offers more
questions than answers.

First, the seemingly answerable questions:

Who won? At this very early juncture it looks like just about everybody
gains. The United States exercised effective pressure to produce a
concrete achievement within the framework of its                                 roadmap. Egypt scored points with the US
and the Arab world by mediating among Palestinians. Israeli Prime
Minister Ariel Sharon can declare victory and argue that his tough
military policies brought Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmoud Abbas (Abu
Mazen) to the fore and Hamas to its knees. But Hamas now has a senior
political role to play above and beyond the Palestinian Authority, and
its popularity has soared. The Palestinian Authority/Palestine
Liberation Organization is delivering on a ceasefire and improved
conditions. Abbas and Yasir Arafat can both claim the victory. The
Israeli and Palestinian peoples may now enjoy a respite from the violence.

How many agreements are there? Three. An agreement by Hamas and Islamic
Jihad                             regarding conditions for negotiating a
ceasefire (hudna) with Israel, a similar but separate agreement by Fateh
                         , and the Palestinian-Israeli ceasefire itself.
The first two were brokered by Egypt, the third by the US. Of critical
importance is the fact that the contents of the agreements, i.e., the
quid pro quos that each demands of Israel, are not identical (see below).

Are we better off today compared, say, to three years ago, when the
peace process was ostensibly flourishing and before the violence began?
Yes, in the sense that the Palestinian leadership is being cleaned up
and the US and Israel are enforcing far tougher rules regarding
terrorism. No, in the sense that the Palestinian leadership is far
weaker and the two sides are farther apart both on issues of substance
and in terms of mutual trust.

Do Israel and the PLO see eye to eye on the "philosophy" of this
ceasefire? No. The Palestinians want to return to the status quo ante
pre-intifada: use of persuasion rather than force against Hamas in order
to avoid civil war (which is why their internal agreements had to
precede the ceasefire with Israel), joint patrols with Israel, release
of all prisoners, and the same agenda for peace negotiations, including
the right of return. Israel--and here Israeli Prime Minister Ariel
Sharon speaks for most Israelis (and Americans)--wants Hamas to be
dismantled, not co-opted, views security cooperation more in terms of
separation than integration, and will adopt tougher positions on some
final status issues, if and when we get to them.

Now, the questions that have no immediate answers:

Who's in charge on the Palestinian side: Hamas, now the most popular
organization? Arafat (and the jailed Mustafa Barghouti), who claim
credit for negotiating the intra-Palestinian hudna? Abu Mazen and his
security chief, Mohammad Dahlan, who negotiated the ceasefire with Israel?

Can the Islamist organizations that reject Israel's existence, and the
PLO/PA, coexist under a joint political agreement and a hudna and manage
their affairs with Israel? Or must the PLO/PA subdue Hamas first? Can
Dahlan deal effectively with the inevitable infractions by Hamas and
Fateh dissidents? Can and will he engage in the "dismantlement of
terrorist capabilities and infrastructure" as the roadmap requires him
to do? Are Hamas' far-reaching demands on Israel (within the
intra-Palestinian agreement), e.g., to release all prisoners and lift
the siege of Arafat's compound, bound to generate renewed fighting after
three months, given that Israel has (understandably concerning the
prisoners) rejected them? If so, why should Israel wait and allow the
militants to rearm and reorganize?

Will Sharon, the Israeli right and some in the security establishment
indeed preempt? Or will they take measured risks and tolerate initial
Palestinian infractions, in the interests of allowing Dahlan to operate
and strengthen his position? Up to what point can they accept that an
imperfect peace is better than a fruitless Palestinian civil war? And
will they take "all necessary steps to help normalize Palestinian life"
as the roadmap demands?

What will Sharon do if the agreement collapses? More of the same, or
reoccupy Gaza and seek to physically eliminate the Hamas leadership? How
will this affect the already shaky status of Abu Mazen, the first
Palestinian leader to unequivocally condemn terrorism and Palestinian
violence? Will the US restrain Sharon, or will he revert to form and not
know when to stop?

Finally, how will the US, which pulled this off, balance the clearly
defined need to eliminate Hamas and the other militant terrorist
organizations with the desire to use the ceasefire as a foundation for a
renewed peace process? How far into the maelstrom of Israeli-Palestinian
relations is President Bush prepared to be drawn? How will the White
House react when the going gets rough?

And where is the senior presidential emissary that both sides need to
"babysit" them in between visits from Secretary of State Powell and
National Security Adviser Rice?

