It is one of the more telling ironies of the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict that an alleged central building block for its solution was
never intended for that purpose and is largely irrelevant and even
counterproductive to any genuine attempt to end the conflict. United
Nations Security Council Resolution 242, approved unanimously on
November 22, 1967 in the aftermath of the Six-Day War, was an attempt to
provide guidelines for peace between Israel and its state neighbors:
Egypt, Jordan, Syria and Lebanon. As such, it has had 50 percent success
thus far, and its principles remain relevant to future negotiations
between Israel and Syria and Lebanon, because it addresses their
bilateral issues and grievances: borders, territory, security, and
recognition.

But UNSCR 242 does not address the most burning issues that divide
Israelis and Palestinians. It never mentions Jerusalem or holy places.
It calls for "a just settlement of the refugee problem" without
mentioning which refugees (Arab? Jewish?) or providing even a hint of a
formula for resolving the relevant refugee issues. It repeatedly refers
to "every State in the area" in the context of peace and security,
thereby further emphasizing its inapplicability to non-state actors like
the Palestinians, whom it never even mentions. Thus when it "affirms the
necessity" for "guaranteeing the territorial inviolability and political
independence of every State in the area, through measures including the
establishment of demilitarized zones", UNSCR 242 provides a useful tool
to Syria and Israel, if and when they get back to the negotiating table,
in order to separate their armies. But it clearly does not refer to
Palestine, which was not a state in 1967, did not fight in that war, and
does not have an army. And finally, UNSCR 242 requests the
secretary-general to designate a special representative to promote
Middle East agreement; that emissary, Gunnar Jarring, never chose to
negotiate with Palestinians.

The PLO accepted UNSCR 242 only in 1988, in response to a set of
American conditions that culminated in Yasser Arafat's renunciation of
terrorism (one of several) and led to a US-PLO dialogue. Accepting UNSCR
242 was considered a kind of entry ticket to the Middle East peace
process. Ever since, it has been included, knee-jerk fashion, in the
preamble to all formulae for Israeli-Palestinian peace--Oslo, Geneva,
the roadmap, etc--always along with UNSC Resolution 338, which was
passed after the 1973 War and which says absolutely nothing relevant to
the Israel-Palestine conflict beyond calling on the sides to implement
UNSCR 242. In the best case, when real negotiations do take place, UNSCR
242 is set aside in favor of a substantive discussion of the real
issues. In the worst case the two sides get hung up on arguments about
how much West Bank and Gazan territory UNSCR 242 demands that Israel
withdraw from (territories or "the" territories).

In 2002, the Security Council passed Resolution 1397, for the first time
(since General Assembly Resolution 181 in 1947) calling for a two state
solution to the Israel-Palestine conflict. That was a step in the right
direction, and UNSCR 1397 is rightfully mentioned since then as a
building block for peace. Would it, then, be fair to say that the
repeated, robot-like mention of 242/338 in the Israeli-Palestinian case
is detrimental to the chances of a settlement? Or is this simply the
harmless, ritual dead wood that any prolonged and complex international
political process carries with it?

Better to leave UNSCR 242 for the history books, and for Israeli-Syrian
and Israeli-Lebanese peace talks. The Israeli-Palestinian issue badly
needs a better set of internationally-mandated guidelines for
negotiations. US President Bill Clinton tried in December 2000. So has
President George W. Bush, over the past three years. He has affirmed US
support for a two state solution, a viable Palestinian state, no return
of Palestinian refugees to Israel and, implicitly, Israeli annexation of
the large settlement blocs adjacent to the green line.

One problem with these presidential guidelines is that, at least on
refugees, the two presidents themselves don't agree on a formula.
Another is that both Israel and Palestine take exception to one or
another of the presidential criteria. Indeed, had the Security Council
gone beyond projecting a two state solution (1397) in March 2002 and
tried to spell out a formula regarding, say, Jerusalem or refugees, the
five major powers would have failed to reach agreement, and 1397 would
not have passed.

In some ways, the fruitless but persistent role played by UNSCR 242 in
the ongoing Israeli-Palestinian conflict is symbolic of the failure of
peace efforts in general.

