The noises coming from the Israeli side denigrating the Fatah
                          and Hamas                            
ceasefire declarations made this week as part of the official
Palestinian commitment "to end armed activity and all acts of violence
against Israelis anywhere" must be taken seriously by the United States.
All Israeli politicians reacted to this Palestinian ceasefire not only
by dismissing it, but more importantly by refusing to reciprocate with
"an immediate end to violence against Palestinians everywhere," which is
what the roadmap                         obliges Israel to do.

Israel is having conceptual difficulties with reciprocating the
Palestinian ceasefire because of its propaganda and straight-out lies
that characterize Palestinian violence as "terrorist" and its own
violence as self-defense and "fighting terrorism." To reciprocate would
require Israel to undermine its own propaganda and admit that its
military attacks are at times unnecessary and provocative. Experience
has taught us, however, that for this process to work, both sides must
contribute to the new environment by stopping all attacks. Period.

The prospect of an end to violence by both sides makes this right-wing
Israeli government very nervous because it will expose Israel to its
obligations vis-a-vis the roadmap, obligations that this government
can't swallow and that threaten its coalition. These obligations include
the immediate dismantlement of all new settlements, beginning with the
so-called "outposts" that have been established over the last two and a
half years. The government faces the prospect of having to halt
settlement expansion, not only in those settlements that Israel
considers "illegal" (i.e. those not established by the government) but
in all of the settlements, which are all considered illegal under
international law.

That is why we are at a very critical crossroads. While this ceasefire
allows the Palestinian Authority to successfully fulfill an important
obligation of the roadmap--one that is a prerequisite for moving
forward--lack of Israeli reciprocity, i.e. a continuation of Israeli
violence against Palestinians will jeopardize this very significant
step. The American administration's welcome of the ceasefire initiative
obliges Washington to convince Israel to reciprocate in kind.

Another significant aspect of this ceasefire is that it comes in tandem
with an Israeli-Palestinian security agreement that will begin reversing
Israel's reoccupation of areas under Palestinian Authority control. But
if the recent withdrawal from areas of the Gaza Strip (and soon
Bethlehem) is not accompanied by an end to the violence in the rest of
the occupied territories, the Gaza-Bethlehem arrangements will be in
danger, which is exactly what happened in three previous attempts at
gradual troop withdrawal.

It must also be clear to the American administration, which is
demonstrating increasing attention and sensitivity to the conflict, that
security arrangements alone or the isolation of security components from
documents like the roadmap (which is unfortunately what marked the
demise of the earlier Mitchell report                        ) can also
lead to failure. That is why the implementation of security agreements,
such as an end to violence by both sides and withdrawal of Israel's
military presence in Palestinian-controlled areas and the assumption of
Palestinian security responsibilities there, must be accompanied by
other non-security-related components of the roadmap, such as a serious
timetable for removing settlement outposts and preventing the settlers
from erecting new ones and then moving on to monitoring a halt in
settlement expansion. Palestinians will measure the seriousness of the
US vis-a-vis the roadmap through its pressure on Israel to stop building
the apartheid/separation wall, for example, which will only consolidate
the settlements, separate Palestinians from one another, and deny
Palestinian farmers of their agricultural land.

Economic components of the first phase of the roadmap are also to be
dealt with in parallel with security components--these include allowing
workers to move freely, first and most visibly inside the West Bank and
Gaza Strip and permitting the Palestinian Authority to rebuild what the
Israeli occupation has destroyed. The secret to the strength of the
roadmap is its integral nature, which enabled it to gain the confidence
of world consensus. If the implementation of the roadmap is not as
comprehensive and integral as its text, then we will again fail in
achieving our objectives of ending violence, undoing the occupation and
bringing peace.

