In addition to everything else, the two peoples, Israelis and
Palestinians, caught up in their extended blood feud, also need to have
healthy memories and above average semantic capabilities. To the
repertoire of solutions that previously included the Oslo agreements
                  , the Clinton principles                       , the
Mitchell plan                        , the Tenet outline
                    , the Bush speech                     and the
roadmap,                         has now been added the "hudna".

This Islamic term has quickly entered Israeli parlance, though not
without a semantic controversy. Is a hudna merely a "ceasefire", as many
Palestinians argue, or does it also embody the added value of
"acquiescence" that many Israelis seek to attribute to the term. These
nuances cannot be underestimated in cultures that attach almost magical
power to words.

Yet the issue of the meaning of "hudna" is not the only problem. Perhaps
for the first time, an agreement with the Palestinians is not splitting
Israeli society between opponents and supporters in accordance with the
traditional contours of right and left. Nearly every solution proposed
in the past enjoyed instinctive support on the left and automatic
rejection on the right. Not this time. It is still easy to find
energetic pockets of opposition on the extreme right that consider the
hudna a certain recipe for disaster, and enthusiastic support among
those on the left that see it as a first step toward a possible
settlement. But in between there is a very large contingent that swings
between hope and despair, that is prepared to give any step a chance,
but that is riddled with doubts regarding the possibility of success.

Not many oppose the hudna; after two years of hard bloodshed it is
difficult to find anyone who would not celebrate even a few days of
peace and quiet, a break in the mutual killing, and the economic
potential embodied in a ceasefire for hundreds of thousands of
unemployed and teetering businesses. But the lack of trust, based on
past experience, is deeper than ever. Even those who believe in the
honest intentions of factions within the Palestinian leadership are
skeptical concerning their capacity to enforce the hudna in the field.
For many, that skepticism is accompanied by misgivings concerning the
good intentions of the Israeli leadership and its ability to withstand
pressures from extremist elements within the right wing government. Even
the dismantling of illegal outposts has become a farce.

Thus only the Israeli stock market has reacted to the emergence of this
hudna with outright optimism, translated into an impressive rise in the
trading index. Everyone else is reacting with cautious pessimism. As
refugees of the euphoria that enveloped the Oslo agreements and victims
of the past three years of attrition, Israelis refuse to abandon
themselves to yet another hope that is liable to prove unfounded. This
attitude has swept many sectors of the Israeli public, regardless of the
question "who is to blame" and "who started it." The "peace of the
brave" has become the ceasefire of the exhausted, like a break between
rounds in a wrestling match.

This is not necessarily bad news. The same sense of fatigue, or worse,
presumably exists among the Palestinian public. Only extremists condemn
this exhaustion as an expression of embarrassing weakness. Sometimes a
collective, exactly like an individual, requires a sign of fatigue in
order to know when to stop. In society, as in our personal lives,
fatigue is a vital regulatory mechanism that signals the limits of force
and endurance. Only senseless individuals, or suicidal societies, do not
hear this internal signal.

Thus the hudna is good and right; perhaps its very modest nature as an
intermediate step offers hope. An intermission from the daily horrors is
exactly what the two societies need if they are to recall how it feels
to live a more normal life, and aspire once again to anchor this
normalcy in a real future agreement. When that time comes, Israelis will
be more sober and realistic as they encounter it.

In retrospect, one of the "marketing" mistakes of the Oslo agreements
within Israeli society was its presentation as a process of
reconciliation instead of as a political agreement. "Reconciliation"
generates expectations that cannot reach fruition at this stage; a
political agreement is a more modest aspiration, wherein the hudna can
be the first phase.

Research done in both societies supports this approach. Despite the
suffering of both in the course of the past three years, a large number
of Israelis and Palestinians express a relatively high degree of trust
in the capacity to reach a political agreement, while only a small
number in both societies believes in "reconciliation now." Hence the
Israeli leadership must make every effort to contribute to the success
of the hudna. It owes this to the people.

