Q: Does Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's revised disengagement
plan deal with any of your objections?

A: Nothing has really been revised. It's essentially the original
plan. My major objection is that it's clear that leaving Gaza
unilaterally at this point will be seen as a victory by the Palestinian
terrorists and will encourage them to do more of the same.

Q: Back in the days of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir you
yourself advocated leaving Gaza. Why do you object now?

A: What has changed is the terrorist attacks on Israel. Now we're
dealing with Hamas and Islamic Jihad. Back then there was no terrorism.

Q: How do you deal with the argument that disengagement is
necessary because the growing West Bank and Gazan population poses an
urgent demographic threat to Israel as a Jewish and a democratic state,
while the spread of the settlements makes it increasingly difficult to
disengage?

A: That argument would have some validity only if we were on the
point of incorporating these areas into Israel. I'm dead set against
illegal settlements. They should have been taken down before they ever
got going.

I don't look forward to dismantling settlements at some time in the
future, but it may become unavoidable. I'd like to believe that under a
peaceful reality we won't have to dismantle settlements. I think the
precedent of turning over territory on condition that it be without a
Jewish presence was established with the Egyptians in Sinai by [Prime
Minister Menachem] Begin and I regret it.

Q: Apropos Egypt, does the projected Egyptian involvement
in restoring security in Gaza have a strategic dimension for Israel?

A: It could have, though I'm not optimistic at all. Egypt is
already in blatant violation of its peace treaty with Israel by not
having an ambassador here and not dealing with the [Rafah] tunnels, so
I'm not optimistic they'll help. [On the other hand], if the Egyptians
are ready to take over the Gaza Strip that would be a significant
development. I'm prepared to give them Gaza. Begin should have done that
years ago. Begin was dead set against even allowing UN observers in
Gaza, not to speak of an Egyptian presence, because he saw Gaza as part
of the Land of Israel.

Q: According to peace process lore from the late 1970s, it
was Begin who offered Gaza to Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and the
latter who refused, arguing that it was Palestinian and not Egyptian land.

A: The myth that Begin offered Gaza to Sadat is totally without
foundation. He should have told Sadat that if Egypt wants Sinai back, it
has to take Gaza with it.

Q: Sharon has seemingly created a fait accompli in selling
his disengagement plan to the United States and now to Egypt.

A: In all these negotiations of recent years, all the concessions
offered by Barak and now Sharon, there is of course a cumulative effect
of fait accompli. These are not good negotiation tactics. The second law
of thermodynamics says "there are no reversible processes in the
universe." It never goes back to where it was before.

Q: Can Sharon prevail and continue as prime minister under
the current circumstances? Can he ram this plan through?

A: Sharon has very thick skin and can remain in office
indefinitely. I don't think he can push the plan through the Likud, but
given his strength of character he can hang in there. There aren't many
people who would flaunt the results of the Likud referendum.

[At the same time], I don't consider the disengagement plan that Sharon
suddenly put on the table as the "be all and end all" of progress in the
Middle East. Unilateral steps have never been a good prescription for
progress in the region.

Q: Are you persuaded by Sharon's rationale for
disengagement-that it is necessary because a political vacuum has been
created that could invite pressures for much heavier territorial
concessions?

A: Not at all. The past years of combat with the Palestinians have
gained Israel serious achievements over Arafat and terrorism, and in
relations with the US. Sharon wasn't facing a vacuum. I don't know why
he adopted this program. He was not under any kind of pressure from the
US to do this.

