In case we needed a reminder of the devastatingly negative effect the
late Yasser Arafat had on the prospects for peaceful coexistence between
Israelis and Palestinians, Chairman Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen) is
providing it. In scarcely days he has negotiated a ceasefire with
Palestinian militants and begun redeploying Palestinian security forces
to maintain the quiet. Security coordination with the Sharon government
has been reestablished, and the two sides are poised to begin discussing
additional confidence-building measures such as prisoner release and
Israeli withdrawals from West Bank cities.

Nothing has changed but the Palestinian leadership.

Where do we go from here? The ceasefire--both among the Palestinian
forces and between them and the Israel Defense Forces--is still very
young and incomplete. Only the passage of time will tell us whether it
is genuine, and in particular, whether Abbas' control over his own
security forces is sufficient. Beyond the obvious need for patience and
good will on the part of both sides, there arises an additional
requirement to translate the ceasefire into a new political process.

Here we return to the roadmap. Both Palestinians and Israelis, as well
as the international community represented by the Quartet, continue to
address the roadmap as the desired political frame of reference. A
comprehensive assessment of the ongoing relevance of the roadmap after
years of bitter fighting and far-reaching local and regional strategic
developments is beyond the scope of this article. But because we are
ostensibly back in phase I of the roadmap, it is vital that we take note
now of both parties' obvious limitations.

Abu Mazen has made it absolutely clear that he has no intention of
collecting illegal weapons and "dismantling the terrorist
infrastructure", as phase I demands. Rather, he seeks to co-opt the
militants into the existing Palestinian political and even
police/military infrastructure. From the internal Palestinian standpoint
the ceasefire is intended to provide breathing space for cooptation
negotiations to take place and to succeed. PM Ariel Sharon for his part
has found it impossible to "immediately dismantle settlement outposts
erected since March 2001". Essentially, he wants his intended
dismantling of 21 settlements in Gaza and the northern West Bank to be
recognized as a viable substitute process. Nor does he intend to reopen
PLO institutions in East Jerusalem as phase I requires. Finally the
Quartet, which was supposed to monitor the ceasefire, has thus far been
caught off guard by developments; conceivably the US will soon begin to
fill this role.

So both Israel and the PA are going to have to be flexible with their
roadmap phase I demands if this ceasefire is to lead to a political
process of some sort. In particular, Israel is going to have to agree to
forego the forcible dismantling of the terrorist infrastructure and give
Abu Mazen a chance to integrate Hamas and the Fateh dissidents into the
Fateh-dominated PA political establishment, as he advocates. Is this a
more effective vehicle for facilitating eventual coexistence between
Israel and a Palestinian state? The test will be whether this
permanently ends Palestinian terrorism, bearing in mind that the total
destruction of Hamas has proven a near impossible task for Israel, let
alone the PA.

We demanded of Arafat that he end the violence by force of arms. This
made sense, insofar as Arafat himself symbolized Palestinian violence.
But we owe it to ourselves to give Abu Mazen's way, which is
diametrically opposed to Arafat's strategy of violence, a decent
chance.

