Q: What strikes you the most about this plan, given the
current state of affairs?

A: My very first impression is that it is a major indicator of
Israeli failure. Sharon has failed to pass his initial plan, on the one
hand because of the vote in the Likud, on the other hand because it was
obviously impossible to implement unilaterally.

Last, the plan seems not to have clarified for the Israeli political
elite whether this will put them in any better place in the near future.

Q: What are the implications for the Palestinian Authority?

A: I don't think that there are many implications, strategically
speaking.

Technically speaking, there are many things still unclear. For example,
the plan states that Israel would no longer be responsible for the Gaza
Strip as an occupying force. Nonetheless, [Israel] will be controlling
the borders, airspace, any possibility for third-party intervention, and
humanitarian needs.

The situation will again be that the Gaza Strip will not be free to act.
Palestinians will not be free to act.

On the other hand, there will be a deepening of the current situation
whereby Israel is legally bound to be responsible for the situation in
the occupied territories, but is actually doing nothing vis-a-vis this
responsibility.

Q: What are the implications for the long term?

A: What can be read in the plan is not so different from the Oslo
arrangements--only the fact that the area to be evacuated from Israeli
presence will be a little larger.

Israel is still securing the crossing points to Egypt, the access to the
sea, there is mention of activities along the coastline, and mention of
military infrastructure being transferred to a third party
authorized-obviously--by Israel.

I see really no difference between this and what was happening in [the
Oslo agreements], aside from minor quantitative differences. Too, Oslo
occurred in an atmosphere of supposed good intentions and good will from
both parties, and the atmosphere now is one of bad intentions and distrust.

Q: One of the comments that we keep hearing is the fear
that the Gaza Strip will become the playground of Hamas. Is that an
accurate assessment?

A: I don't believe so. First of all, I am not sure that Hamas is
in a position to take control in the Gaza Strip, and second, even if it
were, I am not sure that it would want to.

Third, I am not sure this is such a major concern for Israel. Do you
imagine that if Israel were concerned about this, it would be acting
unilaterally?

Q: Do you think Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is
serious about this plan?

A: Yes, I think that he is extremely serious about finding a way
out of the deep trouble that he has got Israel into. The situation in
Israel has deteriorated economically, politically, internationally.
Sharon has come to the conclusion that his old dreams are not realizable
and he is seeking ways out. That is the part that he is serious about,
not the plan.

The plan is one of his experiments as far as I can see, and the more
steps there are, the more experimental it is.

The only thing that the plan really does is create a new demographic
reality. The security dimension is really debatable--I don't know how
they define it. The economic situation depends on the West Bank, mainly.

But the demographic situation, based on widening the Philadelphi route
and solidifying control over some West Bank territories, seems the only
sort of "progress" that Sharon has accomplished in this plan. And that
existed in the old plan, as well.

