A de facto ceasefire appears to have taken general hold between the
Israeli occupying forces and the Palestinian side. However, there has
been no official confirmation from either side as of yet.

Ending the violence has been the primary priority for both sides, but in
different ways. The Palestinians have consistently maintained that the
violence that results from the military occupation of Palestinian land
is the cause of violent Palestinian reactions. For their part, the
Israelis have blamed Palestinian violence against them as the cause of
their own actions.

A solution to the problem of who should cease to do what first can
actually be found in the first phase of the Quartet's roadmap plan,
which considers all the violence a vicious cycle. Accordingly, the
roadmap foresees the two sides ending violence against each other
simultaneously.

The recent calm, nevertheless, is a direct result of an initiative taken
by the Palestinian side, and has been possible for three reasons: first,
the Palestinian leadership gained new legitimacy after the presidential
elections. Second, the new president, Mahmoud Abbas, initiated a mature
and responsible dialogue with all the Palestinian factions. Finally,
Israel intimated indirectly that a calm could be reciprocated without
any declarations or commitments.

For such a ceasefire to be endorsed, consolidated and sustained,
however, a mutual commitment has to be officially declared by the two
sides in no uncertain terms. Such a declaration would only be a step,
however, toward the second and most important move, which would be fast
progress on other issues that have been rightly considered by all
analysts as the causes of that violence.

In particular, all Israeli practices and measures that serve to
consolidate the occupation must be seen to end, especially the illegal
expansions of settlements and the building of the separation wall inside
Palestinian lands. In addition, Israeli economic sanctions must be
lifted, and other types of illegal collective punishment measures, such
as restrictions on movement, mass arrest campaigns and so on, must also
end. This will allow for economic recovery and reduce the unemployment
and poverty afflicting the Palestinian side, which is not only a source
of suffering but also of frustration and anger.

If the two sides are to continue moving in the present direction--which
is what the first phase of the roadmap expects them to do--they need
immediate, strong and effective third party involvement, something also
stipulated in the roadmap as part of a required mechanism to be
established to end the conflict. The Palestinians will need technical
and economic support toward rehabilitation of infrastructure, both
civilian and security-wise. Palestinians also need support for the
economic development plan that was formulated in close coordination with
the donor community led by the World Bank.

This all requires a suitably conducive political and security
environment. The recent calm may provide that environment but must be
taken advantage of for it to continue.

