The declarations by the left wing organizations were threatening. "If
Israel exploits the war in Iraq to carry out a transfer of Arabs," one
of them stated, "this will be a war crime." Israel Defense Forces
soldiers were warned "not to take part in war crimes lest they be placed
on trial by the International Court." Additional manifestos warned that
the new government would exploit the fog of battle to establish new
settlements--also defined as illegal acts that it would be a crime to abet.

In reality, all the shooting was into the air. Israel, which in any
event had no intention of expelling Arabs, in effect even ceased
carrying out targeted assassinations. During the two weeks since the war
in Iraq began, and despite pinpoint terrorism warnings from the police
and the Shabak (General Security Service), the Palestinians' casualties
were the lowest since their brutal terror war began. Even the bombing in
Netanya on March 30, the twelfth there in two and half years, seems not
to have altered this Israeli policy approach.

Paradoxically, the only "mini-transfer" carried out during the war has
been against Jews. On March 25, late at night, soldiers and police broke
into the home of the Ozeri family on a hill, known as hill 26, in Kiryat
Arba, and terrified the widow and children of the late Yoni Ozeri, who
was murdered around two months ago by Arab terrorists. They scattered
everything in the house, as if they had burst into the home of
terrorists, and dragged the mother and her children--who had still not
recovered from the earlier terrorist trauma--out of the house. Friends
of the dead husband who were sleeping in the house to protect the woman
and her children were also removed by force and beaten by the troops.

Hill 26 is one of the so-called "illegal outposts." Some observers
estimate that in the course of the past two and a half years since the
conflict began, more than 100 such outposts have been established. One
of them, the Gilead Ranch in Samaria, was the scene some four months ago
of one of the worst events of recent years: soldiers and police who had
been dispatched to evacuate the ranch on the orders of Labor Party
Minister of Defense Binyamin Ben Eliezer, encountered strong resistance.
The violent confrontation between the security forces and the young
settlers, frequently called "hill youth," shocked the country.

Ben Eliezer, who was already planning the withdrawal of his party,
Labor, from the national unity government headed by Ariel Sharon,
thought he could reap political dividends from this act. But the forced
evacuation, which initially appeared to help him politically, actually
turned into the first act not only in his political decline--he was
removed from the party leadership post--but in that of his party as
well, which had ruled the country for so long: we recall that it
suffered a painful defeat in the recent elections.

Many have asked themselves how a brutal evacuation like that of hill 26
could be carried out when the government is headed by Ariel Sharon and
the Ministry of Defense by Shaul Mofaz. The mystery grows when we
consider that the governing coalition includes National Religious Party
ministers like Efi Eitam, who is described as an extreme rightist (the
NRP received about one fourth of the settler vote in the last
elections), as well as the National Union Party, which has adopted
transfer as one of its slogans.

The answer to this question, as understood by the settler leadership, is
in three parts:

    1. Prime Minister Sharon wants to signal the United States
    president, who is under pressure concerning the roadmap from Arab
    states and from British Prime Minister Tony Blair, that he was
    sincere when he promised, at their last meeting in Washington, that
    there would be no new settlements. He picked the weakest link among
    the settlers: followers of Rabbi Kahane, one of whom was the late
    Ozeri, who enjoy minimal support among the settlers at large and are
    generally opposed by the traditional leadership of the Yesha Council
    (Council of the Communities in Judea, Samaria and Gaza).

    2. This is also a broad hint to the settler activists: they will not
    be allowed to establish any more unauthorized outposts. If they do
    so, they will be treated like the residents of hill 26.

    3. "Only a right wing government can deliver," i.e., the Gilead
    Ranch was the scene of a pitched battle because a minister of
    defense from the Labor Party, enemy of the settlements, gave the
    evacuation order. Faced with a similar directive from a right wing
    government that comprises the NRP and the National Union, the
    settlers would not dare indulge in violent opposition. Witness hill 26.

In private conversations, the heads of the NRP and the National Union
state that they did not join the government to establish additional
settlements. They understand that international circumstances prohibit
such an option. We'll suffice, we hear them say, with preventing removal
of the outposts, and certainly of veteran settlements. But they are not
particularly hopeful at a time when the roadmap                        
is evolving, with Sharon's concurrence and Likud backing, into the next
peace process--what they call "the Likud's Oslo."

