The Oslo Agreement from 1993 required solving the refugee problem,
alongside other major issues, before reaching the permanent agreement,
which was due to have been signed by May 1999. It was obvious that if we
did not find a solution for this painful problem, the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict would remain unresolved, even if a
Palestinian state were set up according to agreed borders. The refugee
problem comprises various components: the story of its creation; the
questions "who created it?" and "why hasn't it been solved until now?";
and the organizational and financial solution.

The Palestinians prefer to start their version of the chain of events
with the Israeli War of Independence of 1948, claiming that the refugees
were expelled by Israel during this war, and that it is their right,
according to United Nations General Assembly Resolution 194, to choose
between return and compensation. The Israelis, however, describe it
differently. According to the Israeli point of view, the Palestinians
made a huge mistake when they rejected the UN's Partition Resolution of
1947, according to which two nations would have been located in
Palestine. Since the Arabs did not find this satisfactory, preferring to
fight with Israel, the situation arose whereby, during the war, some
700,000 Palestinians lost their homes. About half of these Palestinians
lost their homes because they fled, and about half because they were
expelled. UN Resolution 194 was rejected by the Palestinians and by the
Arab countries, as was Prime Minister David Ben Gurion's willingness,
proposed in Lausanne, to absorb 100,000 refugees.

For many years, the Palestinians demanded to set up a secular-democratic
country instead of Israel, and to absorb in this country any refugee who
wished to come. They took the "Wish to Return" as mentioned in UN
Resolution 194, and turned it into the "Right of Return." The year 1974
saw the beginning of the process of separation from the idea of a
secular-democratic country, and since 1988, the Palestine Liberation
Organization (PLO) has accepted the idea of two states--the State of
Israel and the State of Palestine--coexisting alongside one another. It
was clear to many Palestinians and to the Israelis that even if the
Palestinians insisted upon the principle of the "Right of Return," this
right would be applicable to those who would return to the Palestinian
state, rather than to any person wishing to live in Israel, and that if
a "Right of Return to Israel" was granted to the refugees, it would be
tantamount to abolishing the Jewish majority in Israel, practically
overnight.

Until the commencement of the talks with the Palestinian leadership
concerning the permanent agreement, there was an understanding that the
solution of the refugee problem would be found by rehabilitating them in
their current place of residence, relocating them in the Palestinian
State, relocating them in countries which would agree to absorb them,
and paying them compensation. A small number of refugees would be
permitted to enter Israel, under a family reunification plan and special
humanitarian cases. This was also the nature of the understandings
reached between Abu Mazen and myself in 1995.

When the talks began with the Barak government concerning the permanent
agreement, the Palestinians said that the principle of the "Right of
Return" must be incorporated as part of the agreement, and that this
principle would be realized in such a way so as not to endanger the
demographic balance in Israel. Israel presented a contrary approach: it
was willing to receive a limited number of refugees, but it absolutely
rejected the principle, claiming that this would in all likelihood lead
to the foundation of two Palestinian states--the new Palestinian state
and the State of Israel, which in a very short time would become a state
with a Palestinian majority.

The Clinton Plan, dated December 2000, made a determination in this
matter and that was agreed upon, in principle, by the two parties. A
solution to the refugee problem would be devised in which the Israelis
would acknowledge the suffering of the refugees, but Israel would not
assume the sole responsibility for their suffering. A committee would be
set up headed by the United States to handle the problem from the
economic aspects; it would be determined that Israel could not accept
the Right of Return within the boundaries of the State of Israel, but
that there would be a Right of Return to the Palestinian State and to
areas which Israel would transfer to the Palestinian State under a land
exchange agreement. It would be determined that the refugees could be
accepted in third countries; that Israel would agree to receive a
certain number of refugees in accordance with its sovereign decision;
that priority would be given to solving the refugee problem in Lebanon;
and that the agreement would be deemed to be the implementation of
Resolution 194.

The Taba talks were based on the Clinton Plan, and indeed it was easy to
reach various understandings at the Taba talks, based on this plan. At
Taba, agreements were reached concerning the nature of personal
compensation, compensation for assets, options of rehabilitation and
absorption in third countries, and compensation for the host countries.
Above all, we were very close to an agreement concerning the story of
the creation of the refugee problem, which described the Israeli
approach and the Palestinian approach to the issue, and their common
denominator. Specific sums of money were not agreed on, nor was the
actual number of refugees which would be permitted to come to Israel.
However, the distance under dispute between the parties was narrowed
substantially, and the Palestinian side agreed that the number of
refugees must be such that it would not damage Israel's character as a
Jewish country.

Regrettably, the refugee issue has become "proof," as it were, of the
"fact" that it was impossible to reach an agreement between the
Palestinians and Israel, even at a time when Israel was headed by a
particularly moderate government. This claim, however, is quite simply
untrue. The talks at Taba were the best ever held between the parties,
and the closest ever to reaching an agreement. Were it not for the fact
that the talks were held at such a late stage, on the eve of elections
in Israel for a new prime minister, it would have been possible to
complete the Israeli-Palestinian framework agreement at the Taba talks.
If we return to the Clinton-Taba guidelines, we will be able to reach an
agreement on all the open issues, including the refugee problem. And the
quicker we return to these guidelines, the better it will be for all of
us.

