The recent developments in Israel vis-a-vis what was once called the
"unilateral disengagement plan," and which enjoyed the full support of
United States President George W. Bush but failed to get the support of
the Likud party, have generated nothing but confusion and the appearance
of weakness. The plan has now been subjected to various modifications,
but instead of helping Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to regain the
initiative and the upper hand, the process has caused chaos in the
Israeli political scene. Israel's position has been weakened and its
image damaged in the international diplomatic arena.

The main loser in these developments is Sharon. The prime minister
appears unable to lead neither his party nor his government and unable
to fulfill commitments for which he received quite remarkable
international support--that is, if he was really ever serious in his
intentions to get this plan implemented.

This latest plan, which has enamored neither Israel's left or right,
appears to include a new partner. A significant change from the original
plan is a new Egyptian role of three dimensions: number one, Egypt will
play a security role along the Gaza-Egypt borders; number two, it will
rehabilitate and train Palestinian security forces in order to, among
other things, introduce a quieting effect for the enacting of the plan;
number three, Egypt will deliver the Palestinian side to the plan.

Of course, there are other modifications, most important of which is the
graded nature of this plan, which will be based again on performance
along the way. This has very little chance of success due to the fact
that this plan deals mostly only with Gaza and leaves the vast majority
of the occupied territories to the whims of the occupation and its
practices, among them Israel's devastating wall, the growing settlements
and other debilitating measures.

The Palestinian side, which is quite unconvinced of both the seriousness
of the Israeli leadership in pursuing this plan and the probability and
practicality of the plan, is waiting to see if Israel really will
commence a withdrawal or settlement evacuation. Palestinians are
refusing as yet to celebrate these developments or to pay any price
before the withdrawal happens. Meanwhile, they continue to express the
view that if there is any seriousness to any of these plans, they have
no objection to them. However, if the intent is also to end the
violence, these steps should be coordinated and negotiated to include
the West Bank, not only Gaza, and to be part of a wider package that is
a continuous process towards gradually ending the occupation.

It is certain, however, that the political thinking that has been
generated by the current right-wing extremist coalition in Israel will
not allow any serious developments of the kind that will get us out of
the vicious cycle of violence and on the way to peaceful negotiations
based on international legality. At this time, efforts to achieve peace
should concentrate on two objectives: a replacement of this government
coalition of groups that oppose the basis of the peace process and its
requirements, and serious international intervention of the kind that is
able to influence developments in the region.

