The recent and immense Israeli project of the "separation wall" (or what
Palestinians have come to know as the "apartheid wall") has once again
raised the specter of ongoing Israeli settlement expansion and the
confiscation of Palestinian land. Palestinians have long considered
these practices and the policy behind them the single most dangerous
threat to the legitimate Palestinian right to self-determination.
Settlement is not a new phenomenon that began with Israel's 1967
occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Confiscating and buying up
land, building outposts and homes and bringing immigrants to live there
is precisely how European Zionists gradually took over Palestinian land
in what has now become Israel.

It is understandable then, that Palestinians are driven by a deep fear
that this policy is strategically aimed at further consolidating
Israel's military occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip, rendering
it irreversible. The continuity of settlement during and in spite of the
peace process deeply shook Palestinian confidence in a process that, in
the Palestinian mind, was supposed to be about ending the occupation in
exchange for an end to conflict, and the beginning of peace and security
for both sides.

The recent takeover of the Israeli government by parties opposed to the
peace process has offered Israelis who do not believe in territorial
compromise a new opportunity to continue the rapid confiscation of land
and the establishment and expansion of illegal Jewish colonies. This
process has been aggravated to such an extent that many moderates from
the peace camp--including one of the most moderate, Palestinian finance
minister Salam Fayyadh--now believe that the rate of expansion of these
colonies has transformed the reality overnight and invalidated the
possibility of a viable and contiguous Palestinian state. This, of
course, annuls the possibility of a two-state solution, and in turn
makes peace itself impossible.

The current settlement project of choice is the "separation wall." This
project will consolidate the past 35 years of settlement growth by
building walls to divide Palestinian-populated areas from Jewish
colonies that will be integrated with Israel. In spite of the Israeli
attempt to give the impression that these walls are intended to
strengthen the security of Israelis, it is not hard to see past the
smokescreen. One foreign diplomat who conducted a field study of these
walls sardonically dubbed them "Settlements Plus."

While this Israeli government has yet to fulfill expectations that it
might exploit the war in Iraq to expand its campaign of violence against
Palestinians, it has quietly but vigorously pursued a combination of
land confiscation and "closure" in order to build high cement walls in
Jerusalem, Ramallah, the Jordan Valley and along the western side of the
West Bank. It is a supreme irony that this project, which will for all
intents and purposes render the Palestinian state impossible, is
scheduled for completion even before the "road map"
                        (which is supposed to be about creating a
Palestinian state) even commences implementation. The lack of American
attention and diplomatic protestation against this project places grave
doubts on the credibility of the American call for an independent
Palestinian state. Palestinians are left to wonder about the wisdom of
their own strategic decision to seek a two-state solution.

