During the final months of Israeli-Palestinian permanent status
negotiations in 2000-2001, Israelis discovered that the Palestinian
national movement, after preaching "return" for generations, was
seemingly incapable of resolving a logical contradiction. On the one
hand, in the spirit of United Nations Security Council Resolution 242,
it officially acknowledged the Israeli state within the 1967 borders. On
the other, in accordance with its interpretation of United Nations
General Assembly Resolution 194, it required that Israel accept
Palestinian demands for return that potentially neutralized the
Jewish-Zionist underpinnings of that state.

The demand by the Palestinian leadership that Israel acknowledge, in
some form, the refugees' right of return, appeared to Israelis to
reflect an insistence that, at least at the level of principle, the
Jewish state was "born in sin;" that it was in fact, or should be, a
bi-national Arab-Jewish state and eventually, thanks to birthrate
differentials, a Palestinian state. This impression was reinforced by
the increasingly aggressive demands voiced by Israeli Arab leaders,
clearly influenced by Palestinian nationalist positions voiced during
peace negotiations and culminating in the bloody disturbances of October
2000, that Israel accommodate their status by declaring itself a "state
of all its citizens," i.e., no longer a state of the Jewish people.

Israelis understood, of course, that even a successful peace process
would not persuade Palestinians to openly endorse Israel's own national
narrative. This holds that the right of the Jewish people to a country
in their historic homeland was endorsed in 1948 by the world community
and that it was the Arabs' refusal to acknowledge that right and their
attempt to annihilate Israel that created the Palestinian refugee
problem. But how can Israelis make peace with the Palestinians when the
latter insist on conditions regarding refugees that actively negate
Israel's core identity as a Jewish state?

The formulae presented at the Taba negotiations in January 2001 for
bridging the right of return gap did little to reduce Israeli anxiety.
It emerged that Palestinians interpreted Israel's reported readiness to
state that a refugee agreement constitutes implementation of Resolution
194, as an Israeli acknowledgement of the right of return. Who would
guarantee that future generations of Palestinians would not invoke this
clause to grant legitimacy to renewed claims to "return"? Moreover, a
Palestinian commitment to steer refugees toward alternative solutions,
such as resettlement in the State of Palestine or the West and
rehabilitation in their host countries, could easily encounter mass
refugee refusal--based on years of indoctrination, together with the
economic incentive of living in a prosperous country--to accept any
solution but return to Israel, thereby potentially scuttling the entire
agreement.

One key reason why most Israelis are prepared to dismantle the many
settlements that interfere with Palestinian territorial contiguity in
the West Bank and Gaza and even to partition Jerusalem, is their growing
awareness that their demographic security--the capacity to maintain a
solid Jewish majority in Israel over the long term--is as important as
their military security. Today they are acutely aware that even the
modest achievement of a cold peace with Jordan and Egypt and a partial
peace with Palestinians has prompted tens of thousands of Arabs to
infiltrate Israel, with its relative prosperity, looking for work. This
Middle East "north-south" microcosm poses a potential demographic threat
for Israel. Hence Israelis' insistence that a refugee solution fully
respect Israel's Jewish nature, and that peace look more like
"separation" than "integration."

There is one additional problematic aspect of the right of return issue
that requires specific comment: the readiness on the part of the world,
including Israel, to acquiesce in a definition of refugee status that
allows it to be passed on from generation to generation. Nowhere else in
the world is a refugee problem officially in its fifth generation.
Everywhere else, the children and grandchildren of refugees, including
Jewish refugees, may still pursue property compensation claims--but not
"return". Here, then, we must at least begin to contemplate an ominous
possibility. The longer the Palestinian refugee/right of return issue
remains unsolved, the more refugees there will be--until, through
intermarriage, virtually all Palestinians will be "refugees" and, for
better or for worse, the "refugee problem" will simply become synonymous
with the "Palestinian problem."

This points to one possible area of compromise: conceivably, Israel
could recognize some humanitarian right of family reunification, which
Palestinians could label "return," for all first generation refugees,
i.e., those over 54 who were actually born in present day Israel, who
wish to return and who have relatives that could assist in their
absorption. Their number would not be large, nor would they affect the
long-term demographic balance, but their "return" could provide a degree
of satisfaction for the Palestinian narrative without seriously
challenging the Israeli narrative. In exchange, the Palestinian
leadership would agree that all other refugees be resettled or
rehabilitated outside of Israel.

