Since Abu Mazen (Mahmoud Abbas) took formal control over the Palestinian
Authority, he appears to be moving in a direction that his predecessor
avoided, focusing on a ceasefire or hudna. After more than four years of
hard fighting against murderous terrorism, the question we Israelis have
to ask ourselves in this context is not an easy one. On the one hand,
who isn't happy to live in peace and quiet, without terror on the
streets and Qassam rockets landing on Sderot? But on the other, a hudna
clearly does not permit an offensive against the terrorist
infrastructure, and this could entail a significant cost in the future.

During the past three years of the war against terror, the Shabak
(General Security Service) and the Israel Defense Forces succeeded in
reaching and silencing nearly every terrorist activist in Judea and
Samaria. Today the level of terrorism in Judea and Samaria is very low,
mainly due to the IDF's success, with the fence contributing in several
important regions. In contrast, in the Gaza Strip, precisely because the
territory was never reoccupied, the IDF's success is very limited. In a
few unusual operations the Hamas leadership was badly hit, but the
capacity to produce Qassams--the primary threat from Gaza--was not
constrained.

The option of re-conquering all or part of Gaza was apparently under
discussion just prior to the hudna. Had the IDF embarked on such an
operation it would have produced a different capability for combating
terrorism that emanates from Gaza: after a few months of occupation the
level of terrorism there would also have dropped markedly.

The hudna stopped the military dynamic; now we are beginning to discuss
a political dynamic. But lest we forget, in parallel with the political
peace process and the talks between the sides, the ceasefire will enable
the terrorist elements to refurbish, rebuild their capabilities, train
their activists, acquire ordnance, and rest. The terrorists will be that
much more prepared on the day when someone in Ramallah or Damascus, Gaza
or Tehran decides that the time is ripe to renew terrorist attacks. The
worst damage will be in Judea and Samaria, where the terrorist
organizations have a genuine interest in a ceasefire as their only means
of salvation--in view of the intelligence and operational steamroller
the IDF has deployed since Operation Defensive Shield in April 2002.

Shielded by a temporary quiet, as the hudna is historically defined, the
Palestinians will seek to renew the political peace process. Should
Israel agree? Based on the experience gained here since the Oslo
Accords, the answer must be an unequivocal "no". Every time Israel
ignored Palestinian efforts to rebuild a terrorist capability while the
sides were engaging in political contacts, it paid in blood. Back at the
beginning, in 1995, when the late Yitzhak Rabin was prime minister,
Yasser Arafat and Mohammed Dahlan allowed Yihya Ayash to operate in Gaza
and prepare the explosive devices that killed Israelis. We learned then,
the hard way, that a leadership that does not constantly fight terrorism
eventually gives in to it. Nor is there any realistic way to wake up
late, once the terrorist organizations have regrouped, and stop them.

Thus in my view, anyone who allows terror to regroup under his
governance cannot be a viable partner for peace negotiations. If Israel
agrees to this, it will repeat the mistake made in 1994, when Arafat
entered the territories and prevented any attempt to deal with the
terrorist elements. We paid for that mistake in blood, a lot of blood,
as did the Palestinians. Hence I believe that a determined attempt by
Abu Mazen to fight the terrorists is in the long-term Palestinian
interest as well. Wherever there is less terror there is also less
suffering on the part of the population and fewer casualties.

Accordingly, we have no alternative. Israel must condition a return to
political negotiations on the readiness of the Palestinian security
establishment to act against the terrorist organizations, arrest their
leaders, disarm them, destroy their explosives laboratories, and take
immediate steps to cease all incitement to terrorism. The incitement
must stop not only on television and in the official press, but also in
the mosques, the schools and the street banners.

Whoever wants to qualify as a peace partner cannot permit incitement to
murder the people with whom he is negotiating. He certainly should not
be allowed to shelter those who are preparing their weapons for the next
terrorist war.

